<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="EN">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">
               <hi rend="italic">The Life and Death of Jack Straw</hi> and George Peele</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
            <availability>
               <p>© The Author (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
                    journals.permissions@oup.com</p>
            </availability>
            <date>2012</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct type="article">
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <surname>Murphy</surname>
                        <forename type="first">Donna N.</forename>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">
                     <hi rend="italic">The Life and Death of Jack Straw</hi> and George Peele</title>
                  <idno type="articleId"/>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Notes and Queries</title>
                  <title level="j" type="publisher-id">notesj</title>
                  <title level="j" type="hwp">notesj</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0029-3970</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1471-6941</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
                     <date type="Published" when="2012-12"/>
                     <date type="ePublished" when="2012-10-23"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">59</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="513">513</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="518">518</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1093/notesj/gjs166</idno>
               <idno type="publisherID">gjs166</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">The Life and Death of Iacke Straw, a Notable Rebell in England</hi> (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>) was registered 23 October 1593 and published that year. No author’s name or
            acting company was provided on the title page, and nothing is known about its early performances. <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>’s most recent editor, Stephen Longstaffe, noted that the play
            is usually dated 1587–93 and that some have posited it was performed during 1590, when the Lord Mayor’s pageant mentioned Lord Mayor Walworth’s killing of Jack Straw,
            which is depicted in the play. In 1590, the Lord Mayor was a fishmonger, the same occupation as Walworth.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN1">
               <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
            </ref> Since Walworth’s
            killing of Jack Straw was ahistorical, one almost certainly influenced the other, but whether the pageant influenced the play or vice versa is unclear. Janet Clare proposed that this brief
            drama, with only 970 lines of dialogue, was censored: the 1381 Peasants’ Revolt during the reign of King Richard II which it treats ‘is accorded only perfunctory
            attention’ and ‘there is no significant mention of tax abuse’, the main cause of the rebellion.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN2">
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
            </ref> Supporting her
            theory is the fact that scenes II.iv and II.v, as delineated by the Malone Society, together contain only twenty-nine lines of dialogue.</p>
         <p>F. G. Fleay thought that George Peele was at least part author of <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> on the basis of style and because one of the same printers and the same publisher produced it and
            Peele's <hi rend="italic">Edward I</hi>.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN3">
               <hi rend="superscript">3</hi>
            </ref> Hugo Schütt found for Peele’s authorship due to style similarities and
            painstakingly collected parallels. H. C. Hart, J. R. Robertson, and H. Dugdale Sykes concurred.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN4">
               <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
            </ref>
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> is particularly well connected to the anonymous <hi rend="italic">The Battle of Alcazar</hi>, which is generally assigned to Peele, and the anonymous <hi rend="italic">I and II The
                Troublesome Reign of King John (TR)</hi>, which Sir Brian Vickers attributed to Peele.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN5">
               <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
            </ref> Longstaffe observed that more recent
            commentators have attempted to ‘absolve Peele from any responsibility for such a bad play’, and he took no stand as to authorship.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN6">
               <hi rend="superscript">6</hi>
            </ref> Charles R. Forker’s recent edition of <hi rend="italic">TR</hi>, however, annotated <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> as ‘Peele (?)’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN7">
               <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
            </ref> I examined the possibility that Robert Greene wrote the lines for the rebels in <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>, given that his was surely the main hand in
                <hi rend="italic">A Knack to Know a Knave</hi>, which famously echoes numerous plays and pamphlets, including <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>, and Greene was involved in writing at least two of these
                plays.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN8">
               <hi rend="superscript">8</hi>
            </ref> Evidence for Greene’s participation was insufficient to make such an attribution, however, whereas linguistic
            connections to Peele’s works are pervasive throughout.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN9">
               <hi rend="superscript">9</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> includes a dichotomy in speech patterns between two types of groups similar to what we see in <hi rend="italic">Edward I</hi> and <hi rend="italic">TR</hi>. When members of the
            higher-class group speak in verse, it is iambic pentameter. The other group’s verse is usually six to nine syllables long and, among its standard couplets, sometimes contains from
            three to ten rhymed lines in a row. Peele had a penchant for rhyming more than two short lines in a row, which he used for comic effect. In all the plays associated with Greene, Kyd,
            Lodge, Lyly, Marlowe, Nashe, and Wilson, and with Shakespeare through 1596 (according to the Oxford edition of Shakespeare's works edited by Taylor and Wells), the other occurrences
            of rhyming more than two consecutive short lines, with the exception of Greene, are employed under different circumstances: Wilson’s <hi rend="italic">The Cobler’s Prophecy</hi>, in
            prophecies; Lyly’s <hi rend="italic">Mother Bombie</hi>, in prophecies; Kyd’s <hi rend="italic">Cornelia</hi>, in the chorus; Shakespeare’s <hi rend="italic">A Midsummer Night’s
                Dream</hi>, in speech by fairies; and Greene’s <hi rend="italic">Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay</hi>, in speech by the servant Miles. Below are examples from <hi rend="italic">Straw
            </hi>and Peele, wherein I also include occurrences of rhyming the same words ending in ‘-aw’.</p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>For God will giue you strength and might,</p>
                  <p>And put your enemies to flight:</p>
                  <p>To stand against them day and night,</p>
                  <p>For of mine honestie your quarrels right.</p>
                  <p>(III.ii.862–5)</p>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">Parson Ball</hi> I will tell thee.</p>
                  <p>And sweare it of mine honestie,</p>
                  <p>Thou shalt be hangd as well as we. (III.ii.871–3)</p>
                  <p>Gentle <hi rend="italic">Iacke Strawe</hi>, in one line let vs drawe,</p>
                  <p>And wele not leaue a man of lawe.</p>
                  <p>Nor a paper worth a hawe,</p>
                  <p>And make him worse than a dawe,</p>
                  <p>That shall stand against <hi rend="italic">Iacke Strawe</hi>. (II.i.518–22)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
        </p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Hips and haws and sticks and straws   (148)</p>
                  <p>Come for his lady bright,</p>
                  <p>To prove himself a knight,</p>
                  <p>And win her love in fight       (566–8)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
        </p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">Edward I</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Came late from the city,</p>
                  <p>To ask some pity</p>
                  <p>Of this lass so pretty,</p>
                  <p>In likeness of a doleful ditty,</p>
                  <p>—Hang me if I do not pay ye. (Scene viii.95–9)</p>
                  <p>So, there lies a straw,</p>
                  <p>And now to the law.     (Scene vii.19–20)</p>
                  <p>Such a sitting who ever saw?</p>
                  <p>An eagle’s bird of a jackdaw   (Scene viii.82–3)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit> In the language of members of the upper class in <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>, we hear the same type of stately, somewhat stilted verse spoken by, for example, the European
            characters in <hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi>.</p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Hard and vnnaturall be the thoughts of theirs,</p>
                  <p>That sucke the milke, and will not helpe the VVell,</p>
                  <p>The King himselfe being now but young of age:</p>
                  <p>If things should fall out otherwise than well,</p>
                  <p>The blame doth fall vpon the Counsellor,</p>
                  <p>And if I take my aime not all awrie,</p>
                  <p>The Multitude a Beast of many heads,</p>
                  <p>Of misconceiuing and misconstruing minds,</p>
                  <p>Reputes this last beneuolence to the King,</p>
                  <p>Giuen at high Court of Parliament,</p>
                  <p>A matter more requirde for priuate good,</p>
                  <p>Than helpe or benefite of common weale,</p>
                  <p>VVherein how much they wrong the better sort,</p>
                  <p>My conscience beareth witnes in the cause.</p>
                  <p>(I.ii.182–95)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
        </p>
         <p>Compare to <hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">Bishop</hi>. These welcomes worthy governor of Lisbon,</p>
                  <p>Argue an honourable minde in thee,</p>
                  <p>But treat of our misfortune therewithal.</p>
                  <p>To Ireland by Pope Gregory’s command,</p>
                  <p>Were we all bound, and therefore thus embark’d,</p>
                  <p>To land our forces there at unawares,</p>
                  <p>Conquering the island for his Holiness,</p>
                  <p>And so restore it to the Roman faith:</p>
                  <p>This was the cause of our expedition,</p>
                  <p>And Ireland long ere this had been subdued,</p>
                  <p>Had not foul weather brought us to this bay.</p>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">Diego</hi>. Under correction, are ye not all Englishmen,</p>
                  <p>And ‘longs not Ireland to that kingdom, lords?</p>
                  <p>Then, may I speak my conscience in the cause</p>
                  <p>(II.ii.9–22)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> abounds in vocatives, or expressions of direct address. Vickers found that a large number of vocatives in a work was characteristic of Peele.
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>’s occurrence of vocatives once per 6.4 lines (by my count) may be compared to Vickers’ count of once every 6.8 lines in <hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi>, 5.7 in
                <hi rend="italic">TR</hi>, 4.3 in <hi rend="italic">Edward I</hi>, and 4.2 in Peele’s portion of <hi rend="italic">Titus Andronicus</hi>, as opposed to once per 8.7 lines in Shakespeare’s
                portion.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN10">
               <hi rend="superscript">10</hi>
            </ref> On seven occasions, characters name themselves during their own speech, another feature characteristic of
            Peele’s work. Moreover, the Protestant Peele frequently included slurs against Catholic friars and priests, and in <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> a priest is accused of knavery and
            frequenting the ale-house.</p>
         <p>Both <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>, with ‘hangum’ and <hi rend="italic">OWT</hi>, with ‘gibletis’, incorporated false Latin intended to be understood by the audience:
            ‘Touching the permission of destray, towards the said Captaine <hi rend="italic">Miller</hi>, which in blunt and flat tearmes is nominated <hi rend="italic">Sursum cordum, alis dictus hangum
                meum</hi>’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.821) vs. ‘<hi rend="italic">Huanabango</hi>. She is mine, she is mine; <hi rend="italic">meus, mea, meum, in con- / temptum omnium
                grammaticorum</hi>. / <hi rend="italic">Booby</hi>. O <hi rend="italic">falsum Latinum</hi>!/ The fair maid is <hi rend="italic">minum</hi>, / <hi rend="italic">Cum apurtinantibus gibletis</hi> and
            all’ (<hi rend="italic">OWT</hi> 292–6). Both of these excerpts also include legal terms in the mouths of clowns who do not understand them: ‘destray’ is a garbled form
            of ‘destraint’; and ‘cum apurtinantibus’ means ‘with its appurtenances’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN11">
               <hi rend="superscript">11</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>I ran similarities between <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> and Peele’s works as noted by Schütt, Hart, and Longstaffe<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN12">
               <hi rend="superscript">12</hi>
            </ref> along with
            ones I located through the searchable <hi rend="italic">Early English Books Online-Text Creation Partnership</hi> (<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>) database, comprised of 32,863 full texts of works
            written from 1472 to 1700 at the time of this study, and report the phrase checked. No reported similarity occurs more than fifteen additional times (a ‘Near Match’). A
            ‘Match’ is a similarity that appears in the works of Peele, <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>, and no more than one other <hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> record within forty years of
                <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>’s publication.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN13">
               <hi rend="superscript">13</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>One parallel that Schütt discovered is especially noteworthy (bold indicates my emphasis):</p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Your Maiestie and all your Royall Pieres,</p>
                  <p>Shall finde your <hi rend="bold">London</hi> such a store house still,</p>
                  <p>As not alone you shall commaund our wealth,</p>
                  <p>But <hi rend="bold">loyall harts</hi> the <hi rend="bold">treasure</hi> of <hi rend="bold">a Prince</hi>,</p>
                  <p>Shall growe like graines sowne in a fertill soyle</p>
                  <p>(<hi rend="italic">Straw </hi>IV.i.1192–6)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
        </p>
         <p>
            <hi rend="italic">Pageant</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="bold">LOYALTY</hi>.</p>
                  <p>The greatest <hi rend="bold">treasure</hi> that <hi rend="bold">a prince</hi> can have</p>
                  <p>doth lovely <hi rend="bold">London</hi> offer to her queen,</p>
                  <p>Such <hi rend="bold">loyalty</hi> as like was never seen,</p>
                  <p>And such as any English <hi rend="bold">heart</hi> can crave.(71–5)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit> Both excerpts express the opinion that something loyal is the treasure of a prince, and also juxtapose the words ‘London’ and ‘heart’. Neither copies
            the other; both evidence similar patterns of thought, and they constitute an <hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match for Treasure(s) near.30 prince* near.30 loyal*.</p>
         <p>Following are Matches and Near Matches. Additional instances occurring in dramatic and non-dramatic works by other playwrights are also noted: <list type="order">
               <item>
                  <p>‘Of true succeeding Prince, the common sort’, and ‘For as I am your true succeeding Prince’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.ii.179 and III.i.710) vs. ‘To
                        sow the lawful true-succeeding seed’, ‘As for the lawful true-succeeding prince’, ‘Wars, wars, to plant the true-succeeding prince’, and
                        ‘From him to thee as true-succeeding prince’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi> I.i.45, I.i.94, III.iv.69, and V.i.210)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: True
                        succeeding.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘My conscience beareth witnes in the cause’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.ii.195) vs. ‘Then may I speak my conscience in the cause’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar
                        </hi>II.ii.22); and ‘According to the conscience in the cause’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi> Sc. iii.57)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Conscience fby.3 in the
                        cause.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Burdens my heart, and interrupts my sleepe … Surcharged with a heauie loade of thoughts’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.iv.303, 307) vs. ‘So, loth and weary
                        of her heavy load . … Surcharged with the burden that she nill sustain’ (<hi rend="italic">Arraignment</hi> Prologus.17, 19)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO </hi>Match:
                        Surcharg* near.30 heavy load*.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘And though his looks bewray such lenitie, / Yet at aduantage hee can vse extremitie / … He will not put vp any iniurie’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>
                        I.iv.314–5, 7) vs. ‘Was ever such an injury? / Sweet St Withold, of thy lenity, / defend us from extremity’ (<hi rend="italic">1TR</hi> Sc.
                            11.5–7)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Lenity near.30 extremity near.30 injury.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Meane while, sweete Ladie Mother be content’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.iv.348) vs. ‘Take heed, sweet lady-mother, swear not so’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi>
                        Sc. xx.19)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Sweet lady mother.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘So true a bird would file so faire a nest’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw </hi>I.iv.373) vs. ‘In his own nest filed with so foul a bird’ (<hi rend="italic">Anglorum</hi>
                            132)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>: File* near.30 bird* near.30 nest. The phrase is proverbial (Tilley B377), but more commonly contains ‘defile’ instead
                        of ‘file’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs166-FN14">
                        <hi rend="superscript">14</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘And thus my Lord I have aduentured, / To shew your Maiestie my minde herein’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.iv.472–3) vs. ‘Thus far in honour of thy name and
                        aid, / Lord Mahamet, we have adventurèd / To win for thee a kingdom’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi> III.iv.7–9)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>: Lord fby.5 have
                        adventured fby.5 to.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘And from the water did an eccho rise: / That pearst the yeares [ears] of our renowmed King’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> II.iii.566–7) vs. ‘Offspring of that
                        courageous conquering king, / Whose pure renown hath pierced the word’s large ears’ (<hi rend="italic">Descensus </hi>17–8)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>: Pierce [all
                        forms] near.30 king* near.30 renown*, a juxtaposition occurring among playwrights in Anthony Munday’s <hi rend="italic">Palmerin d’Oliva</hi>. Note also:
                        ‘Captains, you hear the reasons of the king, / Which so effectually have pierced mine ears’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar </hi>IV.ii.61–2).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘I good my friends, I pray you hartely’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.i.697) vs. ‘If you love yourselves, walk, good friends, I pray you’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed.
                            1</hi> Sc. ii.124–5)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>: Good fby.5 friend* I pray you. Among playwrights the juxtaposition also occurs in Ben Jonson’s play
                            <hi rend="italic">Every Man in His Humour</hi>, and the Countess of Pembroke’s translation of Garnier’s <hi rend="italic">The Tragedy of Antonie</hi>.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Rydle me a ridle, whats this, / I shall be hangd, I shall not be hangd’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.795–6) vs. ‘ “Riddle me, riddle me whats
                        this?” I’ll have the wench from the conjurer, if he were ten conjurers’ (<hi rend="italic">OWT</hi> 287–8)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>: Riddle me fby.10
                        what’s /what is this.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Saiest thou so my hart, then farewell my pardon: / For Ile doe as yee doe, hang together for companie’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.858–9) vs. ‘Ay,
                        sayst thou so? And if thou wilt, the friar is at liberty. / If not, as I am honest man, I’ll hang you both for company’ (<hi rend="italic">1TR</hi> Sc.
                            11.36–7)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Say [all forms] fby.2 so near.30 hang* fby.5 for company.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘But fight it lustilie in the field’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.861) vs. ‘Lustily meets, mounted in seat of steel … / Waiting their lord’s
                        good fortune in the field’ (<hi rend="italic">Poly</hi>. 58, 66)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Lustily near.100 in the field.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Proud Rebel as thou art take that withall’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.950) vs. ‘Proud rebels, as you are, to brave me so’ (<hi rend="italic">1TR</hi> Sc.
                            13.226)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Proud rebel* as.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘It is our God that giues the victorie’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.970) vs. ‘And thank our God that gave us victory’ (<hi rend="italic">1TR</hi> Sc.
                            10.29)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Our God that give [all forms] fby.3 victory*. Among other playwrights, the juxtaposition also appears in Christopher
                        Marlowe’s <hi rend="italic">II Tamburlaine</hi>.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘To strike a terrour to the Rebels hearts’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.972) vs. ‘For terror to the Frenchmen's harts’ (<hi rend="italic">Garter</hi>
                            144)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>: Terror to fby.5 [including possessive noun] hearts.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘That if they then had left their mutiny, / Or rather had let fall their wrongfull Armes’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> IV.i.1000–1) vs. ‘Thy forwardness to
                        follow wrongful arms, / And leave our famous expedition erst’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi> V.i.111–2)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Wrongful arm(s).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Especially that by name are noted men’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> IV.i.1031) vs. ‘The only noted men of any name’ (<hi rend="italic">1TR</hi> Sc.
                            2.68)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Name near.10 noted man/men.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Saue only those two vnnaturall Englishmen, / O might I say no English nor men, / That <hi rend="italic">Ball </hi>and <hi rend="italic">Tyler</hi> cursed Rebels both’
                            (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> IV.i.1144–6) vs. ‘A number of unnatural Englishmen, / That curse the day so happy held of us, / Whose base revolt from their allegiance
                        due / To prince and country makes them infamous’ (<hi rend="italic">Anglorum</hi> 138–141)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Unnatural Englishman/men near.30
                        curs*.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘My Gratious Lord this honourable Grace/ So far aboue desert, sith what I did / My dutie and alleagaunce bad me doe, / Binds me and my successors euermore’
                            (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> IV.i.1187–90) vs. ‘This comfort, madam, that your grace doth give / Binds me in double duty whilst I live’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi>
                        Sc. vi.59–60)—<hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> Match: Grace near.30 duty near.30 binds me.</p>
               </item>
            </list>
        </p>
         <p>Following are other noteworthy similarities: <list type="alpha-lower">
               <item>
                  <p>‘What is he an honest man? the deuill he is’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.i.68) vs. ‘<hi rend="italic">Jack</hi>. He can sing, rhyme with reason, / and rhyme without
                        reason, and without reason or rhyme. / <hi rend="italic">Lluellen</hi>. The divel, he can!’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi> Sc. ii.216–8).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘If things should fall out otherwise than well’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.ii.185) vs. ‘If any man say otherwise than well’ (<hi rend="italic">D&amp;B</hi> Sc.
                        vii.135).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘The Multitude a Beast of many heads’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.ii.188) vs. ‘The multitude—a beast of many heads—’ (<hi rend="italic">2TR</hi> Sc.
                        2.125). The phrase is proverbial (Tilley M308), but the wording in both excerpts is identical.</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘Of these vnnaturall Rebels and vniust, / That threaten wracke vnto this wretched Land’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw </hi>I.iv.300–1) vs. ‘To chastise malcontents
                        / That threat her honour’s wrack’ (<hi rend="italic">Descensus</hi> 32–3).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘As we are giuen to know, / By Letters’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.iv.343–4) vs. ‘And, as by letters we are let to know’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi>
                        III.ii.17).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘A litle sparke hath kindled all this fire’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.iv.345) vs. ‘Pure sparks of virtue kindling honour’s fire’
                            (<hi rend="italic">Poly.</hi> 231).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘And when a King doth set downe his decree, / His sentence should be irreuocable’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> I.iv.441–2) vs. ‘This is my doom, and this my
                        doom shall stand / Irrevocable, as I am King of England’ (<hi rend="italic">1TR</hi> Sc. 1.213–4); and ‘And this sentence is irrevocable’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed.
                            I</hi> Sc. xii.141–2).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘More heard [hard] mishap than had of like bin mine, / Had I not marked bin to be a King’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.i.638–9) vs. ‘Thou mightst have
                        managed arms successfully! / But from our cradles we were markèd all’ (<hi rend="italic">Alcazar </hi>V.i.170–1).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘But thers no such matter, we be no such fooles’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> III.ii.850) vs. ‘There’s no such matter, Pan; we are all friends’
                            (<hi rend="italic">Arraignment</hi> I.i.19).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘For being common souldiers in the campe, / Were rather led with counsell of the rest’ (<hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> IV.i.1061–2) vs. ‘And will not, for
                        prevention of the worst, / Lodge with the common soldiers in the field’ (<hi rend="italic">D&amp;B</hi> Sc. ix.108–9).</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>‘And so Lord <hi rend="italic">Maior, Newton, Morton</hi> and the rest, / Accompany vs to gard vs to the Tower, /Where wele repose and rest our selues all night’
                        (IV.i.1207–9) vs. ‘In peace and honour rest you here, my sons; / Rome’s readiest champions, repose you here in rest' (Peele’s portion of <hi rend="italic">Titus
                            Andronicus</hi>, I.i.150–1); and ‘Now, then, let us repose and rest us here’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi> Sc. iii.6).</p>
               </item>
            </list> The above linguistic connections to a wide cross-section of Peele’s works, together with style similarities, lead me to believe that George Peele wrote
            <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi>.</p>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="fn-group">
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN1">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi> Stephen Longstaffe, <hi rend="italic">A Critical Edition of The Life and Death of Jack Straw</hi> (Lewiston, 2002). See also <hi rend="italic">The Predecessors of Shakespeare</hi>,
                    ed. Terence P. Logan and Denzell S. Smith (Lincoln, 1973), 252–8.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN2">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">2</hi> Janet Clare, <hi rend="italic">Art Made Tongue-tied by Authority</hi> (Manchester, 1990), 37–9.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN3">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">3</hi> Frederick Gard Fleay, <hi rend="italic">A Biographical Chronicle of the English, Drama, 1559–1642</hi> (London, 1891) II, 153.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN4">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">The Life and Death of Jack Straw, ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des elisabethanischen Dramas</hi>, ed. Hugo Schütt (Heidelberg, 1901); William Shakespeare,
                        <hi rend="italic">The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth</hi>, ed. H. C. Hart (London, 1931), xxiv–xxviii; J. R. Robertson, <hi rend="italic">An Introduction to the Study of the
                        Shakespeare Canon</hi> (London, 1924), 251; and H. Dugdale Sykes, <hi rend="italic">Sidelights on Elizabethan Drama</hi> (London, 1924), 89.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN5">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi> Regarding the attribution of <hi rend="italic">The Troublesome Reign of King John</hi> to Peele, see <hi rend="italic">The Troublesome Reign of John, King of England</hi>, ed.
                    Charles R. Forker (Manchester, 2010); and Brian Vickers, ‘<hi rend="italic">The Troublesome Raigne</hi>, George Peele, and the Date of <hi rend="italic">King John</hi>’,
                        <hi rend="italic">Words that Count: Essays on Early Modern Authorship in Honor of MacDonald P. Jackson</hi>, ed. Brian Boyd (Newark, 2004), 78–116.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN6">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi> Longstaffe, <hi rend="italic">A Critical Edition</hi>, 8.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN7">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> = <hi rend="italic">The Life and Death of Jack Straw 1594</hi> (Oxford: Printed for the Malone Society at the University Press, 1957); <hi rend="italic">TR</hi>
                    = <hi rend="italic">The Troublesome Reign of John, King of England</hi>, Forker edn. All previously acknowledged works by Peele are from <hi rend="italic">The Works of George
                    Peele</hi>, ed. A. H. Bullen (London, 1888). <hi rend="italic">Alcazar</hi> = <hi rend="italic">The Battle of Alcazar</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Anglorum</hi> = <hi rend="italic">Anglorum
                        Feriae</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Arraignment</hi> = <hi rend="italic">The Arraignment of Paris</hi>; <hi rend="italic">D&amp;B</hi> = <hi rend="italic">David and Bethsabe</hi>;
                        <hi rend="italic">Descensus</hi> = <hi rend="italic">Descensus Astraeae</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi> = <hi rend="italic">Edward I</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Garter</hi> = <hi rend="italic">The
                        Honour of the Garter</hi>; <hi rend="italic">OWT</hi> = <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>; <hi rend="italic">Pageant</hi> = <hi rend="italic">The Device of the Pageant
                        Borne before Woolstone Dixi</hi>; and <hi rend="italic">Poly</hi>. = <hi rend="italic">Polyhymnia</hi>.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN8">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi> These parallels are reported in Longstaffe, 22–3. For Greene’s hand in the authorship of <hi rend="italic">Knack</hi>, see Hanspeter Born, <hi rend="italic">The Rare Wit
                        and the Rude Groom</hi> (Bern, 1971).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN9">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi> Regarding the subject of proverbs, for example, <hi rend="italic">Straw</hi> contains the common expression ‘go to the pot’: ‘Or els his pledges goes to the
                    pot’ (274). Given Greene’s frequent repetition of the same proverbs, if he were the author, it probably would have appeared elsewhere in his extensive canon, but it
                    does not. It does occur, however, in a work by the far-less-prolific Peele: ‘For goes this wretch, this traitor, to the pot’ (<hi rend="italic">Ed. I</hi> Sc. v.142).
                        <hi rend="italic">Straw’s</hi> proverbial ‘The weakest now a days goes to the wall’ (I.i.75–6) does occur elsewhere in Greene and not in Peele, but in Greene,
                    its expression is different, e.g. ‘The weakest is thrust to the wall’ in <hi rend="italic">Mamillia</hi>.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN10">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi> Vickers, ‘<hi rend="italic">The Troublesome Raigne</hi>’, 86–93. For Peele's portion of <hi rend="italic">Titus Andronicus</hi>, see Brian Vickers,
                        <hi rend="italic">Shakespeare, Co-Author</hi> (Oxford, 2002), 148–243.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN11">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi> George Peele, <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives Tale</hi>, ed. Patricia Binnie (Manchester, 1980), 53 n. 297.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN12">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi> Schütt, <hi rend="italic">The Life and Death of Jack Straw</hi>, 34–42; Hart, <hi rend="italic">The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth</hi>, xxv–xxvii; and
                    Longstaffe, <hi rend="italic">A Critical Edition</hi>, 23–4.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN13">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi> The following <hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi> terminology is employed: ‘fby.5’ = ‘followed by’, the second term follows within five words of the
                    first term; ‘near.20’ = the second term occurs within twenty words either before or after the first; and ‘*’ = a placeholder for endings,
                    such that ‘star*’ will find ‘starre’, ‘startle’, ‘starboard’, etc. Special care was taken to search for unusual spellings, since
                    texts are uploaded in their original state. I made use of <hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>’s ‘variant spelling’ option, supplemented by various spellings listed in the
                        <hi rend="italic">Oxford English Dictionary</hi>.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs166-FN14">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi> Morris Palmer Tilley, <hi rend="italic">A Dictionary of the Proverbs in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries</hi> (Ann Arbor, 1950).</p>
            </note>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
