<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="EN">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">‘<hi rend="italic">Simon’</hi> and the Date of George Peele’s <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>
            </title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
            <availability>
               <p>© The Author (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
                    journals.permissions@oup.com</p>
            </availability>
            <date>2012</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct type="article">
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <surname>Hanabusa</surname>
                        <forename type="first">Chiaki</forename>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">‘<hi rend="italic">Simon’</hi> and the Date of George Peele’s <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>
                  </title>
                  <idno type="articleId"/>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Notes and Queries</title>
                  <title level="j" type="publisher-id">notesj</title>
                  <title level="j" type="hwp">notesj</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0029-3970</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1471-6941</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
                     <date type="Published" when="2012-12"/>
                     <date type="ePublished" when="2012-10-19"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">59</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="508">508</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="511">511</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1093/notesj/gjs156</idno>
               <idno type="publisherID">gjs156</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>GEORGE PEELE’s <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> was entered in the Registers of the Stationers’ Company in 1595.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN1">
               <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
            </ref> The first and only known edition of the play was subsequently printed in quarto by the end of the year.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN2">
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
            </ref> It
            was once argued that the mention of a dramatic company printed on its title page was ‘designed to attract the reader, and its reliability is suspect’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN3">
               <hi rend="superscript">3</hi>
            </ref> Recent critics and editors of the play, however, are unanimous in accepting the phrase ‘played by the Queenes Ma-|iesties players’
            literally and without suspicion.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN4">
               <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>The play, not divided into acts or into scenes, consists of only 1,170 lines of verse and prose. The brevity of the text constituted the main topic of discussion with regard to the nature
            of the printer’s copy-text. A number of textual critics and editors, in particular, W. W. Greg, Harold Jenkins, Frank S. Hook, and Patricia Binnie, contributed to a long, complicated
            history of the analysis of the text from 1908 to 1980.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN5">
               <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
            </ref> The discussion on the provenance of the copy-text culminated in 1984 when
            Paul Werstine concluded that there is good reason to believe in the possibility that ‘a theatrical manuscript, perhaps an abridgement, stands behind <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives
                Tale</hi> quarto’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN6">
               <hi rend="superscript">6</hi>
            </ref> Although neither the arguments of Greg and Jenkins nor the discussions by Hook and Binnie offered
            anything besides mere conjecture, Werstine’s analysis, drawing on multiple textual clues and evidence, has since been considered the most logical and persuasive. In 1996, Charles
            Whitworth endorsed Werstine’s theory when he proposed, in the introduction to his edition, that the text, of foul papers origin, was used as a performance script, perhaps
            subsequently cut down for a touring production.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN7">
               <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
            </ref> Werstine’s thesis has since stood unchallenged. It is reasonable, accordingly,
            to conclude that the text of <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> was printed from a theatrical play-book deriving from foul papers, perhaps abridged.</p>
         <p>As long ago as 1933, Harold M. Dowling suggested that the unique speech prefix ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ on C4<hi rend="superscript">v</hi> of the play may be ‘a relic of the prompt copy
            and as such may refer to the actor’ who played the role at a performance.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN8">
               <hi rend="superscript">8</hi>
            </ref> This is the only speech prefix in the play to
            replace the usual ‘<hi rend="italic">Churchwarden</hi>’, though the warden subsequently reveals his name ‘<hi rend="italic">Steeuen Loache</hi>’ on D1<hi rend="superscript">v</hi>.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN9">
               <hi rend="superscript">9</hi>
            </ref> Werstine argues that, in the case of <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>, where the authorial manuscript was abridged and used
            as the prompt-book, an actor’s name might remain intact, for ‘dramatic manuscripts abridged and probably annotated for the theater retain many stage directions and speech
            headings characteristic of the author’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN10">
               <hi rend="superscript">10</hi>
            </ref> Dowling added to his conjecture further by delving into contemporary theatre
            history; he identified ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ with John Symons, the actor and tumbler, who joined the Queen’s Men after Richard Tarlton’s death in 1588. Symons is
            known to have stayed for only a short time; in 1589, the town account of Nottingham recorded ‘Symons and his companie, being the Quenes players’, but he subsequently joined the
            Admiral’s Men by the court season of 1588–9.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN11">
               <hi rend="superscript">11</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>Given more recent and precise information of the Queen’s Men personnel than what was known in 1933, however, one would, unavoidably <hi rend="italic">contra</hi> Dowling, deter from
            identifying ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ with John Symons, although, regrettably, some editors of the play have still accepted Dowling’s dubious identification
            unquestioningly in the introduction or the commentary of their modern editions.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN12">
               <hi rend="superscript">12</hi>
            </ref> None but only one Elizabethan player currently
            known to theatre historians was both active in the 1590s and called ‘Simon’ by his surname or forename; Simon Burde was a member of the Children of Paul’s in 1550s, while
            Simon Goodale, son of Thomas Goodale who was ‘a player of Enterludes’, was born in 1594 but died in the following year.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN13">
               <hi rend="superscript">13</hi>
            </ref> The speech prefix ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ is more likely, though not demonstrably evident, to be representing Simon Jewell than John Symons, as Scott
            McMillin and Sally-Beth MacLean proposed.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN14">
               <hi rend="superscript">14</hi>
            </ref> Jewell was a sharer and player of the Queen’s Men who played <hi rend="italic">The Old
                Wives’ Tale</hi>. His will, first discovered by Mary Edmond in 1974,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN15">
               <hi rend="superscript">15</hi>
            </ref> is dated 19 August 1592, and his death caused
            by plague seems to have followed shortly after it was completed, for he was buried at St Leonard Shoreditch on 21 August. Jewell’s will was finally administered by his colleagues on
            23 August.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN16">
               <hi rend="superscript">16</hi>
            </ref> His affiliation with the theatrical company is evidenced by the appearance of the names, in his will, of such eminent
            and minor players as ‘mr Ihonson’ (i.e. William Johnson), ‘Roberte Nicholls’, ‘mr Smithe’ (William Smith), and ‘mr Cooke’ (Lionel Cooke),
            all of whom are known, or are believed to have been, members of the Queen’s Men.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN17">
               <hi rend="superscript">17</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>The appearance of an actor’s name was a fairly common phenomenon in contemporary dramatic texts. Not only the author but an annotator, or a book-keeper, might, not infrequently,
            inscribe an actor’s name in the authorial foul papers or a theatrical manuscript. Instances abound of speech prefixes replaced by the actor’s name. In Shakespeare’s plays
            performed by the Lord Chamberlain’s players, one may recollect ‘<hi rend="italic">Kemp</hi>’ (William Kemp) and ‘<hi rend="italic">Cowley</hi>’ (Richard Cowley) printed
            as the speech prefix on G3<hi rend="superscript">v</hi>–G4<hi rend="superscript">v</hi> of the first quarto of <hi rend="italic">Much Ado about Nothing</hi> (1600). John Sincler’s name,
                ‘<hi rend="italic">Sincklo</hi>.’, appears on S3<hi rend="superscript">r</hi> in the Folio text of <hi rend="italic">The Taming of the Shrew</hi> (1623). Stage-directions too can be affected.
            Kemp’s name appears in the stage-direction, ‘<hi rend="italic">Enter Will Kemp</hi>.’ instead of ‘<hi rend="italic">Enter Peter</hi>.’, on K3<hi rend="superscript">v</hi> of the second
            quarto of <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi> (1599), while Sincler was referred to again in ‘<hi rend="italic">Enter Sincklo and three or foure officers</hi>’ on K3<hi rend="superscript">v</hi> of the
            first quarto of <hi rend="italic">2 Henry IV</hi> (1600). According to Allison Gaw, of the extant Shakespearean play-texts, references of this kind are scattered through seven editions of six
                plays.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN18">
               <hi rend="superscript">18</hi>
            </ref> To Gaw’s list, one may wish to add Shakespeare’s co-authored play, <hi rend="italic">Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>
            (1634), where two players, ‘<hi rend="italic">Curtis</hi>’ (Curtis Greville) and ‘<hi rend="italic">T. Tucke</hi>’ (Thomas Tuckfield), are mentioned on I4<hi rend="superscript">v</hi> and
                L4<hi rend="superscript">v</hi>. Of the early modern printed play-texts published in 1500–1660, a character with the name ‘Simon’ appears, either as the speech prefix or in the
            stage-direction, in a total of twelve plays.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN19">
               <hi rend="superscript">19</hi>
            </ref> Of the twelve, <hi rend="italic">The Taming of A Shrew</hi> is the only other play whose
            conjectured date of performance, 1592, falls within the years when Jewell was alive.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN20">
               <hi rend="superscript">20</hi>
            </ref> In <hi rend="italic">A Shrew</hi>, when Sly asks
            the Lord ‘Whats thy name?’, he replies to Sly that his name is ‘Simon’ (A4<hi rend="superscript">r</hi>). In the following scene, the second stage-direction reads ‘Enter
            Simon, <hi rend="italic">Alphonsus</hi>, and his | three daughters.’ (B1<hi rend="superscript">r</hi>). The title page of the first quarto of the play, however, reads ‘As it was sundry times
            acted by the | <hi rend="italic">Right honorable the Earle of</hi> | Pembrook his seruants.’ As there is no firm basis on which to doubt the ascription, this would evidently
            render the possibility of Jewell’s appearance in <hi rend="italic">A Shrew</hi> remote. McMillin and MacLean had no reason to include the play in the Queen’s Men stock.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN21">
               <hi rend="superscript">21</hi>
            </ref>
            <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> is the only extant play where one can detect the trace of Jewell as an active player.</p>
         <p>Whether the speech prefix ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ in <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> was inscribed in the authorial manuscript by Peele, or, later on, in a
            theatrical script by the book-keeper or an annotator, we cannot be certain. Common sense suggests, however, that it would serve no purpose to inscribe his name after his retirement or his
            death. It is, therefore, reasonable to think that the inscription of his name must have occurred while Jewell was still alive and active, and that his name was inscribed in ink before the
            end of August 1592. The appearance of his name in the 1595 quarto, long after his death, could simply be interpreted as a reproduction of the original manuscript.</p>
         <p>The conclusion that we have reached, in turn, leads to a fresh question concerning the date of composition of <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>. The question is far from agreed on
            by the critics. The play is currently believed to have been written either between <hi rend="italic">c</hi>. 1588 and 1594,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN22">
               <hi rend="superscript">22</hi>
            </ref> or
            ‘almost certainly 1589–90’,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN23">
               <hi rend="superscript">23</hi>
            </ref> or between <hi rend="italic">c</hi>. 1591 and April 1595,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN24">
               <hi rend="superscript">24</hi>
            </ref> or ‘Not earlier than 1591 or later than 1594’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN25">
               <hi rend="superscript">25</hi>
            </ref> It has already become
            evident from the discussion above that its <hi rend="italic">terminus ad quem</hi> was August 1592 when Jewell died. The key to determining the <hi rend="italic">terminus a quo</hi> is Robert
            Greene’s play, <hi rend="italic">The History of Orlando Furioso</hi>, entered first on 7 December 1593 and printed in 1594,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN26">
               <hi rend="superscript">26</hi>
            </ref> from
            which, as all recent editors agree, Peele borrowed in <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> a single, almost identical passage, as well as the magician’s name
            ‘Sacrapant’, a variation of ‘Sacripant’ in Greene’s text.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN27">
               <hi rend="superscript">27</hi>
            </ref> This fact is enough to show that
            Peele’s play was written after <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi>.</p>
         <p>Discussion on the date of the composition of <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi> currently reaches two different conclusions, to which most of the modern editors and critics of <hi rend="italic">The Old
                Wives’ Tale</hi> have kept being blind. First, Greg suggested in 1922 that Greene’s play was based on Sir John Harington’s translation of Ludovico Ariosto’s
                <hi rend="italic">Orlando Furioso</hi> printed in 1591.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN28">
               <hi rend="superscript">28</hi>
            </ref> The book is known to have been entered on 26 February 1590/91.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN29">
               <hi rend="superscript">29</hi>
            </ref> In addition, Greg detected that the engraved title page ‘contains a medallion portrait of the translator with an inscription
            of 1 August the same year’, that is, ‘<hi rend="italic">Primo August anno Domini 1591</hi>.’ Greg concluded that, as ‘There appears no reason to suppose that
            Harington’s work circulated in manuscript’, it seems ‘highly probable that Greene’s attempt at dramatizing the story of Orlando’s madness was the direct
            outcome of the appearance of the English Ariosto, and was undertaken in the early autumn of 1591’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN30">
               <hi rend="superscript">30</hi>
            </ref> Second, Martin Wiggins
            most recently argues that Greg’s suggestion depends upon nothing more than the omission of a terminal ‘-e’ in a proper name, which is not uncommon in Elizabethan
            orthography. He states, instead, that, in the text of Greene’s <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi>, there are indications pointing to his use of the Italian original, especially a specific
            verbal debt to the Italian text of Canto 27 in the play’s Scene 4. Wiggins finally concludes that <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi> was composed in the winter of 1590–1 before
            Shrovetide, which was mid-February and before Harington’s version was registered.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN31">
               <hi rend="superscript">31</hi>
            </ref> To conclude, on the basis of the two
            supposed dates of the composition of <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi>, the existing scholarship suggests that the <hi rend="italic">terminus a quo</hi> of <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi>
            would be between mid-February and the autumn or winter of 1591.</p>
         <p>In the third edition of <hi rend="italic">Annals of English Drama 975–1700</hi>, <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> is listed in the section of ‘1590’ with the limits of
                ‘<hi rend="italic">c</hi>. 1588<hi rend="italic">–</hi>1594’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN32">
               <hi rend="superscript">32</hi>
            </ref> But the speech prefix in question seems to indicate that
            the date of Peele’s play fall within an ever narrower range of years, that is, between mid-February 1591 when Greene’s manuscript of <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi> became available
            to Peele, and August 1592 when ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ Jewell died.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs156-FN33">
               <hi rend="superscript">33</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="fn-group">
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN1">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi> The play was entered on 16 April 1595 by Ralph Hancock, bookseller. See Edward Arber, <hi rend="italic">A Transcript of the Registers of the Company of Stationers of London
                        1554–1640</hi> (London and Birmingham, 1875–94), II, 296.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN2">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">2</hi> See W. W. Greg, <hi rend="italic">A Bibliography of the English Printed Drama to the Restoration</hi> (London, 1939–59), I, 222 (137(A)); <hi rend="italic">STC</hi> 19545, in
                    Alfred W. Pollard and G. R. Redgrave (eds), <hi rend="italic">A Short-Title Catalogue of Books Printed in England, Scotland, &amp; Ireland and of English Books Printed Abroad
                        1475–1640</hi>, 2nd edn, rev. W. A. Jackson, F. S. Ferguson, and Katharine F. Pantzer (London, 1976–91), II, 223.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN3">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">3</hi> G. M. Pinciss, ‘Thomas Creede and the Repertory of the Queen’s Men 1583–1592’, <hi rend="italic">MP</hi>, lxvii (1970), 321–30, esp. 321.
                    Pinciss believed that ‘the vague printer’s notice “played by the Queenes Majesties Players”… could apply to the Children of the Chapel … or by
                    extension to any company invited to perform before Elizabeth’, and concluded that ‘This play can hardly be assigned to the Queen’s Men with any assurance’
                    (323–4).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN4">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi> See, for instance, Brian Walsh, <hi rend="italic">Shakespeare, the Queen’s Men, and the Elizabethan Performance of History</hi> (Cambridge, 2009); Helen Ostovich,
                    Holger Schott Syme, and Andrew Griffin (eds), <hi rend="italic">Locating the Queen’s Men, 1583–1603: Material Practices and Condition of Playing</hi> (Farnham, 2009).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN5">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi> Greg remarked that ‘The quarto almost certainly represents a mutilated text and the indications of staging are confused’, with reference to numerous
                    variations of speakers’ names, in <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives Tale 1595</hi>, ed. W. W. Greg, The Malone Society Reprints (Oxford, 1908 [1909]; repr. 1965), vii, ix; Jenkins
                    conjectured that the play was of an abridgement, mutilation, and revision, in his ‘Peele’s “Old Wives’ Tale” ’, <hi rend="italic">Modern Language
                        Review</hi>, xxxiv (1939), 177–85, esp. 178; Hook concluded that the printer’s copy was ‘an authorial manuscript in a state before final
                    revision—foul papers’, in <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives Tale</hi>, ed. Frank S. Hook, in <hi rend="italic">The Dramatic Works of George Peele</hi>, The Yale Edition of the Life
                    and Works of George Peele (New Haven, 1970), III, 343; Binnie supported the foul paper origin, but finally gave up tracing the origin of the copy-text, mentioning that ‘the
                    exact nature of the printer’s copy may never be known’, in <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives Tale</hi>, The Revels Plays, ed. Patricia Binnie (Manchester, 1980), 19–20.
                    Robert Shaughnessy, the editor of the most recent edition of the play, was regrettably silent about the provenance of the printer’s copy-text, in <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives
                        Tale</hi>, in <hi rend="italic">Four Renaissance Comedies</hi>, ed. Robert Shaughnessy (New York, 2004), 1–3.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN6">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi> Paul Werstine, ‘Provenance and Printing History in Two Revels Editions: Review Article’, <hi rend="italic">Medieval &amp; Renaissance Drama in England</hi>, i
                    (1984), 243–62, esp. 246–51.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN7">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">The Old Wife’s Tale</hi>, The New Mermaids series, ed. Charles Whitworth, 2nd edn (London, 1996), xxxi–xxxii.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN8">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi> Harold M. Dowling, ‘The Date and Order of Peele’s Plays’, <hi rend="italic">N&amp;Q</hi>, clxiv (1933), 164–8, 183–5, esp. 184.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN9">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi> Prior to Dowling, in the nineteenth century, Alexander Dyce had regarded ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ as a ‘mistake … for
                        “<hi rend="italic">Steeven</hi>”’, which A. H. Bullen closely followed, augmenting Dyce’s argument with the hypothesis that ‘Probably the prefix in the
                    MS. was “S”.’ See Alexander Dyce (ed.), <hi rend="italic">The Dramatic and Poetical Works of Robert Greene &amp; George Peele</hi> (London, 1861), 451; A. H. Bullen
                    (ed.), <hi rend="italic">The Works of George Peele</hi> (London, 1888), I, 323. From a bibliographer’s view point, it seems hard to demonstrate precisely that the compositor at the
                    printing-house misread Peele’s secretary hand ‘Steeven’ (or ‘Steeuen/Steuen’) and set up ‘<hi rend="italic">Simon</hi>’ instead.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN10">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi> Werstine, ‘Provenance and Printing History’, 246.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN11">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi> E. K. Chambers, <hi rend="italic">The Elizabethan Stage</hi> (Oxford, 1923), II, 111, 119; Andrew Gurr, <hi rend="italic">The Shakespearian Playing Companies</hi> (Oxford, 1996),
                    204–5, 309.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN12">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi> See Hook, <hi rend="italic">Old Wives Tale</hi>, III, 349; Binnie, <hi rend="italic">Old Wives Tale</hi>, 12, 63; Whitworth, <hi rend="italic">Old Wife’s Tale</hi>,
                    xxxi–xxxii, 2. Shaughnessy is silent on this matter in his edition.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN13">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi> See Edwin Nungezer, <hi rend="italic">A Dictionary of Actors</hi> (New Haven, 1929), 79; Mark Eccles, ‘Elizabethan Actors II: E–J’,
                        <hi rend="italic">N&amp;Q</hi>, xxxviii (1991), 455.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN14">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi> Scott McMillin and Sally-Beth MacLean, <hi rend="italic">The Queen’s Men and their Plays</hi> (Cambridge, 1998), 111.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN15">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">15</hi> Mary Edmond, ‘Pembroke’s Men’, <hi rend="italic">RES</hi>, xcviii (1974), 129–36, in which she transcribed the original will (TNA 11/80, fols
                        130<hi rend="superscript">v</hi>–131<hi rend="superscript">r</hi>).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN16">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">16</hi> See E. A. J. Honigmann and Susan Brock (eds), <hi rend="italic">Playhouse Wills 1558–1642: An Edition of Wills by Shakespeare and His Contemporaries in the London
                        Theatre</hi> (Manchester, 1993), 58–60. This edition corrects Edmond’s minor errors in transcription. For more details of Jewell’s will and his
                    involvement in the Queen’s Men, see my article, ‘The Will of Simon Jewell and the Queen’s Men Tours in 1592’, Early Theatre (forthcoming).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN17">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">17</hi> Scott McMillin, ‘Simon Jewell and The Queen’s Men’, <hi rend="italic">RES</hi>, cvi (1976), 174–7.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN18">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">18</hi> Allison Gaw, ‘Actors’ Names in Basic Shakespearean Texts, with Special Reference to <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Much Ado</hi>’,
                        <hi rend="italic">PMLA</hi>, xl (1925), 530–50, esp. 530.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN19">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">19</hi> See Thomas L. Berger, William C. Bradford, and Sidney L. Sondergard, <hi rend="italic">An Index of Characters in Early Modern English Drama Printed Plays
                        1500–1660</hi> (Cambridge, 1998), 90. The compiled data in this book include both surname and forename; Jewell does not appear.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN20">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">20</hi> The date of the play has not yet reached a unanimous agreement among critics. The play is listed in the section of 1592 as the date of first performance, in Alfred
                    Harbage (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Annals of English Drama 975–1700</hi>, rev. S. Schoenbaum, 3rd edn, rev. Sylvia Stoler Wagonheim (London, 1989), 58. Stephen Roy Miller has
                    proposed that ‘Between mid-1592 and spring 1594 seems the likeliest range for the compilation and playing of <hi rend="italic">A Shrew</hi>’, in his edition of <hi rend="italic">The
                        Taming of a Shrew: The 1594 Quarto</hi> (Cambridge, 1998), 34.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN21">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">21</hi> See McMillin and MacLean, <hi rend="italic">Queen’s Men and their Plays</hi>, 88<hi rend="italic">–</hi>93.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN22">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">22</hi> Hook, <hi rend="italic">Old Wives Tale</hi>, III, 311; Binnie, <hi rend="italic">Old Wives Tale</hi>, 5.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN23">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">23</hi> Pinciss, ‘Thomas Creede’, 323.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN24">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">24</hi> Whitworth, <hi rend="italic">Old Wife’s Tale</hi>, xix. ‘April 1595’ was the date of entrance of the title in the Registers of the Stationers’
                    Company, as I mentioned above.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN25">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">25</hi> McMillin and MacLean, <hi rend="italic">Queen’s Men and their Plays</hi>, 94.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN26">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">26</hi> See Greg, <hi rend="italic">Bibliography</hi>, I, 208 (123 (a)); <hi rend="italic">STC</hi> 12265.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN27">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">27</hi> For details of the discussion, see Hook, <hi rend="italic">Old Wives Tale</hi>, III, 307; Binnie, <hi rend="italic">Old Wives Tale</hi>, 5; Whitworth, <hi rend="italic">Old Wife’s
                        Tale</hi>, xix. All the three editors agree that Peele was the borrower and <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi> the original, not the other way round.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN28">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">28</hi> The date of the publication of Ariosto’s <hi rend="italic">Orlando</hi> is clear from the colophon printed at the end of the text. The colophon on Oo4<hi rend="superscript">r</hi>
                    reads, ‘Imprinted at London by | Richard Field dwelling in the Black-|friers by Ludgate. | 1591.’</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN29">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">29</hi> W. W. Greg, <hi rend="italic">Two Elizabethan Stage Abridgements: The Battle of Alcazar &amp; Orlando Furioso</hi>, The Malone Society Extra Volume (Oxford, 1922; repr.
                    1964), 125–6; Arber, <hi rend="italic">Transcript</hi>, II, 576.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN30">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">30</hi> Greg, <hi rend="italic">Two Elizabethan Stage Abridgements</hi>, 126–7. For the date engraved at the upper side of the oval frame of his portrait, See
                        <hi rend="italic">STC</hi> 746.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN31">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">31</hi> Martin Wiggins, <hi rend="italic">British Drama, 1533–1642: A Catalogue</hi> (Oxford, 2012–), III, entry 876.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN32">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">32</hi> Wagonheim, <hi rend="italic">Annals</hi>, 56.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs156-FN33">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">33</hi> Wiggins puts the date of <hi rend="italic">The Old Wives’ Tale</hi> before Shrovetide 1592, in his <hi rend="italic">British Drama</hi>, III, entry 913. I would like to
                    thank David Bevington, Peter Holland, and John Jowett for their helpful suggestions for my draft of this essay. Special thanks are due to Richard Proudfoot and Martin Wiggins for
                    their insightful comments and corrections. I am indebted to Tetsuhito Motoyama, Waseda Univ., for stylistic improvements.</p>
            </note>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
