<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="EN">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">Another Echo of Gregory’s <hi rend="italic">Regula Pastoralis</hi> in the Old English <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>
            </title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
            <availability>
               <p>© The Author (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
                    journals.permissions@oup.com</p>
            </availability>
            <date>2012</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct type="article">
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <surname>Jones</surname>
                        <forename type="first">Christopher A.</forename>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">Another Echo of Gregory’s <hi rend="italic">Regula Pastoralis</hi> in the Old English <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>
                  </title>
                  <idno type="articleId"/>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Notes and Queries</title>
                  <title level="j" type="publisher-id">notesj</title>
                  <title level="j" type="hwp">notesj</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0029-3970</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1471-6941</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
                     <date type="Published" when="2012-12"/>
                     <date type="ePublished" when="2012-10-12"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">59</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="470">470</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="476">476</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1093/notesj/gjs157</idno>
               <idno type="publisherID">gjs157</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>THE Old English poem known as <hi rend="italic">(The) Seasons for Fasting</hi> was printed for the first time in 1942 by Dobbie in volume six of The Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN1">
               <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
            </ref> His edition relied on a then-recently discovered transcription made in 1562 by the antiquary Laurence Nowell. For his part, Nowell had copied the
            poem from a later tenth-/early eleventh-century book from Winchester that would thereafter enter Sir Robert Cotton’s library as manuscript Otho B.xi. When the Asburnham House fire of
            1731 destroyed most of the Otho manuscript, Nowell’s transcription (now London, British Library, Additional 43703) became the most complete surviving witness to the poem, although
            its value as such went unrecognized for centuries.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN2">
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>The medieval exemplar must have had its share of scribal errors. From what we know of Nowell’s habits as a copyist, moreover, he almost certainly added his own transcription mistakes
            and deliberate alterations.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN3">
               <hi rend="superscript">3</hi>
            </ref> Early scholarship on <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi> therefore concentrated on matters of textual
            criticism, and, before long, Dobbie’s text and notes were trailed by a long list of important corrections and suggestions.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN4">
               <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
            </ref>
            Studies of the poem’s sources lagged, meanwhile, in part because early critics could summon little enthusiasm for the subject matter of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>. Its
            almost 230 surviving verses treat the calendrical reckoning of the four Ember Fasts (lines 1–102) and the biblical precedents for the forty-day fast of Lent (lines 103–83). A
            final section (lines 184–230) begins a scathing critique of clergy who fail to observe the church’s ordained fasts, before the text breaks off incomplete.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN5">
               <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>If many readers have been put off by this ‘homiletic’ content, others have faulted the ‘prosaic’ tendencies of the verse (i.e. the poet’s use of vocabulary
            normally restricted to Old English prose).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN6">
               <hi rend="superscript">6</hi>
            </ref> A minority of critics, however, have argued for the interest of the text both on its own
            terms and as a window on late Anglo-Saxon ecclesiastical culture.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN7">
               <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
            </ref> The most articulate exponent of this view is Mary P. Richards,
            whose interest in the substance of the poem has led to a clearer demonstration of its links with various late Anglo-Saxon homiletic and legislative writings. Richards has explored these
            connections most effectively for the first two parts of the poem, namely those on the dates of the Ember Fasts and on the biblical precedents for Lent.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN8">
               <hi rend="superscript">8</hi>
            </ref> But the final part of the work as it survives—the attack on corrupt churchmen (lines 184–230)—has yielded fewer definite rewards to
            source-hunters. Richards and others have rightly compared the poet’s depiction of lax clergy to broadly similar complaints expressed in canonistic and legal texts from the period,
            but the resemblances are of a general kind.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN9">
               <hi rend="superscript">9</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>Otherwise, only one literary source has been plausibly identified for this part of the poem. In lines 206–7, the author encourages his real or imagined lay audience to imitate the
            wholesome teachings that clergy say, not the wickedness that they do. To reinforce the point, a cryptic allegory follows: ‘Drince he [<hi rend="italic">scil.</hi> the sinful clergyman] him
            þæt drofe; duge hlutter þe / wæter of wege—þæt is wuldres lar’ (Let him drink the turbid pool; let clear water from the current—that
            is the doctrine of glory—work good in you).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN10">
               <hi rend="superscript">10</hi>
            </ref> The importance of these lines for source-study was not evident at first; Dobbie
            had encumbered 206b with a drastic emendation that Sisam and Leslie quickly showed to be unnecessary.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN11">
               <hi rend="superscript">11</hi>
            </ref> Their support for
            Nowell’s original reading (the one that I quote above) was soon confirmed by Schabram and Whitbread, who identified as the source of the poet’s image an exegesis of Ezechiel
            34:18–19 found in Gregory the Great’s <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> i.2.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN12">
               <hi rend="superscript">12</hi>
            </ref> The Old English passage has adapted the
            allegory subtly: where Gregory states that immoral pastors themselves drink the clear water but muddy it for their flocks, the ‘you’ whom the poem encourages to drink
            ‘clear water … [which] is the doctrine of glory’ is the lay addressee (cf. 202 <hi rend="italic">folces mann</hi>).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN13">
               <hi rend="superscript">13</hi>
            </ref>
            By these changes the poet alters the emphases of the Latin original, focusing sympathy on the lay flock and flattering their virtue at the clergy’s expense.</p>
         <p>It seems to have escaped notice that a second passage, from later in Gregory’s <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi>, is the most likely source for several lines in the poem shortly
            before those concerning the <hi rend="italic">hluttor wæter</hi>. The lines at issue are 195 through 199, but to provide more context I begin quoting from 192: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Þonne is þearf micel þeoda mænium</p>
                  <p>þæt þa sacerdos sylfe ne gyltan,</p>
                  <p>ne on leahtrum hiora ligegen to fæste.</p>
                  <p>Hwa mæg þyngian þreale hwilcum</p>
                  <p>wiþ his arwesan, gyf he him ærur hæfð</p>
                  <p>bitere onbolgen, and þæs bote ne deð,</p>
                  <p>ac þa æbyligþe ealdere wrohte</p>
                  <p>dæg-hwamlice dædum niwað?<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN14">
                        <hi rend="superscript">14</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
               </quote>
            </cit> The final two lines quoted have occasioned some disagreement. Dobbie and Holthausen construed <hi rend="italic">wrohte</hi> in 198b as a verb (i.e. <hi rend="italic">worhte</hi> with
            metathesis), and the latter took <hi rend="italic">ealdere</hi> as dative singular of <hi rend="italic">ealdor</hi> ‘lord, ruler’. Sisam made better sense of the line, construing
                <hi rend="italic">ealdere wrohte</hi> as a genitive or dative (feminine) noun phrase ‘of/for (the) old injury’, dependent on accusative <hi rend="italic">æbyligþe</hi>
                ‘anger’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN15">
               <hi rend="superscript">15</hi>
            </ref> Incorporating Sisam’s view, an idiomatic translation would be: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>The multitudes of people therefore have great need that priests, for their part, should not offend or remain too set in their vices. Who will be able to intercede on behalf of any
                    servant before his lord if he [the intercessor] himself has already bitterly angered him [the lord] and does not atone for it, but instead, by his actions, renews daily the
                    [lord’s] anger at that past injury?<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN16">
                        <hi rend="superscript">16</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
               </quote>
            </cit> The available editions and commentaries shed no light on the backgrounds to this passage, and the one parallel indicated by the <hi rend="italic">Fontes Anglo-Saxonici</hi>
            database is not very close.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN17">
               <hi rend="superscript">17</hi>
            </ref> The most probable source is in fact again the first book of Gregory’s <hi rend="italic">Regula
                pastoralis</hi>. The context there is Gregory’s explanation that pastors must live blameless lives because doing so makes the pastor <hi rend="italic">familiaris</hi> ‘on
            intimate terms’ with God and thus an empowered intercessor. To illustrate the point, and to contrast the effective with the immoral (and hence counterproductive) intercessor, Gregory
            introduces a vivid analogy: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Si enim fortasse quis ueniat, ut pro se ad intercedendum nos apud potentem quempiam uirum, qui sibi iratus, nobis uero est incognitus, ducat, protinus respondemus: Ad intercedendum
                    uenire non possumus, quia familiaritatis eius notitiam non habemus. Si ergo homo apud hominem de quo minime praesumit fieri intercessor erubescit, qua mente apud Deum
                    intercessionis locum pro populo arripit, qui familiarem se eius gratiæ esse per uitae meritum nescit? Aut ab eo quomodo aliis ueniam postulat, qui utrum sibi sit placatus
                    ignorat? Qua in re adhuc aliud est sollicitius formidandum, ne qui placare posse iram creditur, hanc ipse ex proprio reatu mereatur. Cuncti enim liquide nouimus, quia cum is qui
                    displicet ad intercedendum mittitur, irati animus ad deteriora prouocatur.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN18">
                        <hi rend="superscript">18</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
            <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>(If a person comes to fetch me to intercede on his behalf before some powerful man who is angry at that person and yet unknown to me, right away I will reply: ‘I cannot come
                    intercede because I have no relationship of familiarity with that [powerful] man.’ If one therefore feels embarrassed before another human being with whom he does not presume
                    to intercede, by what reasoning does a man act on the people’s behalf as their intercessor before God if that man does not know himself to be, by the merit of his life, on
                    familiar terms with God’s favor? Or how will a man seek pardon for others if he is uncertain whether [God] is well-satisfied with him? In this regard, there is something else
                    to be dreaded even more anxiously—namely that the one whom we trust to placate wrath may himself be deserving of wrath, owing to his own guilt. For we all know full well that
                    when a person dispatched to intercede causes displeasure, the temper of the already angered party is provoked to even worse degrees.)</p>
               </quote>
            </cit> Gregory’s example dramatizes the social world of the late antique bishop as a powerful patron, surrounded by clients whose welfare could depend on their pastor’s
                <hi rend="italic">familiaritas</hi> with higher civil and ecclesiastical authorities.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN19">
               <hi rend="superscript">19</hi>
            </ref> Just as in his passage on the ‘clear
            water’ of doctrine, however, the <hi rend="italic">Seasons-</hi>poet has modified the emphases of Gregory’s original. In the poem, concern shifts away from the potential awkwardness
            and guilt that attend the patron–client relationship from the pastor’s viewpoint (which is also Gregory’s). The poet drops altogether the theme of
                <hi rend="italic">familiaritas</hi> and emphasizes instead how the plight of the flock is worsened by pastors whose immorality exacerbates their lord’s (or Lord’s) anger. Gregory
            acknowledges that some pastors may fall short, but his programme of instruction in the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> as a whole assumes that most will not. The poet’s satirical
            and polemical aims, on the other hand, have less use for such optimism.</p>
         <p>The identification of a second substantial borrowing by the poet from the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> raises two further questions. First, does any evidence suggest that the poem
            depends at either moment on the Old English prose translation of Gregory’s work often attributed to King Alfred? This question has received passing attention in earlier analyses of
            lines 206–7 as a reflex of <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> i.2 (on the ‘clear water’ of teaching). Richards has stated that those lines ‘may have been inspired
            by a passage from the [Old] English translation’ of Gregory’s text. But she does not consider the question further, merely citing Schabram’s article that first
            demonstrated in detail the poet’s reliance on the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi>.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN20">
               <hi rend="superscript">20</hi>
            </ref> In addition to quoting the Latin from
                <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> i.2, Schabram’s study did indeed also quote the corresponding sections both from the Old English prose translation and from the Old English
            interlinear gloss to the <hi rend="italic">Liber scintillarum</hi>, where the relevant passage from Gregory’s text appears in cap. 32 (<hi rend="italic">De doctoribus siue rectoribus</hi>).
            Schabram did not go so far as to claim, however, that either Old English version influenced the poet; he seems to have included the quotations rather to illustrate the availability of
            Gregory’s water metaphor in vernacular contexts and to sample how other translators rendered the passage into Old English.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN21">
               <hi rend="superscript">21</hi>
            </ref>
            Some correspondences of wording do appear among the poem, the earlier prose translation and the gloss. Thus we find collocations of <hi rend="italic">hluttor</hi> with
                <hi rend="italic">wæter</hi> in all three; and Gregory’s verb <hi rend="italic">perturbare</hi> (cf. forms of <hi rend="italic">turbare</hi> from Ezechiel 34:19) is answered by the noun
                <hi rend="italic">drofe</hi> at <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 206 and forms of the verb <hi rend="italic">gedrefan</hi> in the prose translation and the <hi rend="italic">Liber scintillarum</hi> gloss.</p>
         <p>On review, then, there are some similarities, but of a kind that could just as easily have arisen independently in three unrelated translations of the same Latin material. This negative
            conclusion now seems all the more likely in view of the newly recognized dependence of lines 195–9 on <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> i.10. In this case, the relevant source
            passage does not appear at all in the <hi rend="italic">Liber scintillarum</hi>, so the Old English gloss to that work may be left out of comparison. The entire Latin passage is, however,
            translated in the late ninth-century prose version of the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi>: <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Hwæt wenstu nu, gif hwelc forworht monn cymð &amp; bitt urne hwelcne ðæt we hine læden to sumum ricum menn &amp; him geðingien, ðonne he wið
                    hine iersað? Gif he me ðonne cuð ne bið, ne nan monn his hiredes, ic wille him suiðe ræðe andwyrdan &amp; cueðan: Ne mæg ic ðæt
                    ærendigean: ic ne eom him sua hiwcuð. Gif we ðonne scomiað ðæt we to uncuðum monnum suelc sprecen, hu durre we ðonne to Gode suelc sprecan?
                    Oððe hu dear se gripan on ða scire ðæt he ærendige oðrum monnum to Gode, se ðe hine selfne hiwcuðne ne ongiet Gode ðurh his lifes
                    geearnunga? Oððe hu dearr he ðingian oðrum monnum &amp; nat hwæðer him selfum geðingod bið? He mæg ondrædan ðæt he for his
                    ægnum scyldum mare ierre gewyrce. Ealle we witon bi monnum, se se ðe bitt ðone monn ðæt him ðingie wið oðerne ðe he bið eac ierre,
                    ðæt irsigende mod he gegremeð &amp; wierse ierre he astyreð.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN22">
                        <hi rend="superscript">22</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
               </quote>
            </cit>
            <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>(Now what will you expect if any criminal comes and asks one of us that we lead him to some powerful person and intercede for him when [the powerful person] is angry at him? If he
                    [the powerful one] is not known to me, nor is any person of his household, I will very quickly answer him [the petitioner] and say: ‘I cannot perform that mediation; I am not
                    so familiar with him.’ If we therefore feel shame to say such [words of intercession] to people we do not know, how dare we say such to God? Or how dare any man undertake the
                    office of mediating for others with God [when that man] does not know himself to be familiar with God through the merits of his life? Or how will he dare intercede for others, not
                    knowing whether he himself has been interceded for? He may fear causing greater anger on account of his transgressions. We all know that, among men, if one asks another to
                    intercede on his behalf with another [third] man who is also angry with [the intercessor], he [the petitioner? the intercessor?] enrages the wrathful temper and incites worse
                        anger.)<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN23">
                        <hi rend="superscript">23</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
               </quote>
            </cit> This follows Gregory closely, although the pronomial references grow so confusing by the end that it is not absolutely certain that the translator understood the Latin, or
            that an Anglo-Saxon audience could have followed what Gregory meant. The dynamics of <hi rend="italic">familiaritas</hi>—a theme that, as we have seen, the poet of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for
                Fasting</hi> largely suppresses—is conveyed plainly by the prose translator and even expanded in order to encompass not just the powerful (<hi rend="italic">rice</hi>) man but
            members of his household (<hi rend="italic">hired</hi>). At the level of word-choice as well, few correspondences stand out between the poem and prose: only <hi rend="italic">þyngian</hi> at
                <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 195 mirrors forms of <hi rend="italic">(ge)ðingian</hi> in the prose (although the latter also uses <hi rend="italic">ærendian</hi> in a similar sense). All in
            all, more striking are the differences between the poet and the early West-Saxon translator: the two have imagined Gregory’s indefinite petitioner (<hi rend="italic">si </hi>…
                <hi rend="italic">quis</hi>) in starkly divergent ways, the poet envisioning a faultless and vulnerable <hi rend="italic">þræl</hi> (195b), the prose-author a condemned criminal
                (<hi rend="italic">hwelc forworht monn</hi>).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN24">
               <hi rend="superscript">24</hi>
            </ref> The poet’s more sympathetic regard for the petitioner’s situation is
            consistent with his championing of the beleaguered flock against their corrupt pastors. Likewise, the poet’s terms of lordship (<hi rend="italic">arwesan</hi> 196) and reconciliation
                (<hi rend="italic">bote</hi> 197) suit his religious-allegorical purposes nicely but have no correspondence in the prose. The prose, moreover, uses an entirely different vocabulary of anger
                (<hi rend="italic">ierre</hi> and forms of the verb <hi rend="italic">iersian</hi>; also <hi rend="italic">gegremað</hi>; cf. <hi rend="italic">onbolgen</hi> and <hi rend="italic">æbyligþe</hi> in
                <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 197–8).</p>
         <p>It seems, then, the poet was almost certainly <hi rend="italic">not</hi> relying on the early West-Saxon translation for this passage; or rather, if he did know that version, he ignored both its
            wording and the slant of its interpretation. And if the poem does not reflect the influence of the Alfredian-era translation in lines 195–9, it is reasonable to conclude, in the
            absence of strong contrary evidence, that the same is probably true for the adaptation of Gregory in lines 206–7 as well. In sum, if the poet was relying on any prior Old English
            version of these two passages, that version does not seem to have survived.</p>
         <p>Turning back, finally, to the possibility that the Latin <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> was the poet’s source, we find that a different question remains: did the poet know
            Gregory’s treatise directly or merely from quotations of it embedded in some other text? The truth here is probably irrecoverable, but the question is worth framing, for it bears on
            arguments about the poem’s structure and origins. Whitbread briefly suggested that the author’s use of the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> in lines 206–7 (the water
            metaphor) created a link, of sorts, between the first and third major divisions in the poem. That is, in the first part of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>, Gregory the Great is
            mentioned by name twice as author of the Anglo-Saxon custom for calculating the spring and summer Ember Fasts.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN25">
               <hi rend="superscript">25</hi>
            </ref> Whitbread’s
            notion that Gregory’s prominence in the first part of the work inspired the poet to turn to the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> when attacking corrupt pastors in the last part is
            appealing but tenuous. Neither of the (now) two definite echoes of Gregory’s treatise names the patristic author, nor, so far as I can tell, do other lines of the poem show clear
            debts to the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi>. Indeed, the subordination of Gregory’s authority to the poet’s topical concerns near the end of the text should perhaps
            encourage us to seek an intermediate source that follows a similar strategy.</p>
         <p>The poet certainly could have encountered the Gregorian passages in their original context, but they were also available through indirect channels. For instance, as mentioned above, the
            Gregorian source for lines 206–7 (<hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> i.2) was transmitted in the <hi rend="italic">Liber scintillarum</hi>, a popular anthology compiled by the monk
            Defensor of Ligugé around 700.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN26">
               <hi rend="superscript">26</hi>
            </ref> Given the general character of the last part of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>,
            however, and its resonances with Anglo-Saxon canonistic and legal writings,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN27">
               <hi rend="superscript">27</hi>
            </ref> I speculate that an ascetic anthology such as the
                <hi rend="italic">Liber scintillarum</hi> is a less probable intermediary than another influential work, namely the so-called <hi rend="italic">Institutio canonicorum</hi>. This text was produced
            in connection with the Council of Aachen (August–September 816) and aimed at reform of Frankish secular clergy.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN28">
               <hi rend="superscript">28</hi>
            </ref> Among the
            quotations of patristic, conciliar, and canonical authorities that make up the complete <hi rend="italic">Institutio canonicorum</hi>, we find Gregory’s <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi>
            i.10 (the source for <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 195–9) and i.2 (the source for <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 206–7) quoted at length in chapters 13 and 27, respectively, of the Aachen
                text.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN29">
               <hi rend="superscript">29</hi>
            </ref> The additional fact that both the poem and the Aachen Council present the two Gregorian passages in the same order,
            reversing their sequence in the original <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi>, is suggestive though hardly conclusive. The <hi rend="italic">Institutio canonicorum</hi> is a sprawling work,
            wherein our two Gregorian passages are separated from each other by lengthy matter from which the <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi>-poet does not draw. On the other hand, the
                <hi rend="italic">Institutio</hi> as a whole does offer plenty of the kind of material—including prohibitions against clergy visiting taverns (Canons 60 and 90) or violating universal
            fasts (Canon 69)—that underlies the Anglo-Saxon canonistic and legal texts that most resemble the last section of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting.</hi>
            <ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN30">
               <hi rend="superscript">30</hi>
            </ref> The possibility that the poet encountered the Gregorian passages from the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> in the Aachen <hi rend="italic">Institutio
                canonicorum</hi>, or in some epitome derived from it, would explain the easy blending of patristic imagery with canonistic prescription in the last segment of the poem.
            Additionally, the form of the Aachen text bears on the question of whether the poet believed Gregory to be the authority not just for the English reckoning of Ember Fasts but for the
            homiletic ideas paraphrased in verses 195–9 and 206–7: the <hi rend="italic">Institutio</hi> cites its patristic sources by name, and the headings for its chapters that concern us
            (capp. 13 and 27) both begin ‘Gregorii de pastoribus …’</p>
         <p>There is one final implication of the scenario being sketched here. Reception of the two Gregorian passages through a compilation indebted to the 816 Council of Aachen also strengthens the
            hypothesis that <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi> originated in ‘reformist’ circles of the late Anglo-Saxon church. More specifically, the author may have had access to many
            of the same sources as underlie Archbishop Wulfstan’s writings and the manuscripts of reference-material that reflect, at varying removes, Wulfstan’s interests.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN31">
               <hi rend="superscript">31</hi>
            </ref> Among those materials were portions, at least, of the <hi rend="italic">Institutio canonicorum</hi>, a work whose influence on both
            Wulfstan and his contemporary, Ælfric the homilist, has been recognized for some time. The extracts from the Aachen <hi rend="italic">Institutio</hi> preserved in Wulfstanian manuscripts
            are not very extensive, nor do they happen to include our particular passages from Gregory.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs157-FN32">
               <hi rend="superscript">32</hi>
            </ref> But behind them may have stood,
            somewhere, a more complete text of the <hi rend="italic">Institutio</hi> available in late tenth- or early eleventh-century England and known to the anonymous poet of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for
                Fasting</hi>.</p>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="fn-group">
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN1">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi> Elliott Van Kirk Dobbie (ed.), <hi rend="italic">The Anglo-Saxon Minor Poems</hi> (New York, 1942), 98–104, with commentary at 194–8. Other editions in print
                    depend largely on Dobbie, namely: Ferdinand Holthausen, ‘Ein altenglisches Gedicht über die Fastenzeiten’, <hi rend="italic">Anglia</hi>, lxxi (1952–3),
                    191–201; Maria Grimaldi, ‘The Seasons for Fasting’, <hi rend="italic">AION: Filologia germanica</hi>, xxiv (1981), 71–92. Two unpublished doctoral theses present
                    new editions, translations, and commentary; by far the more useful is Hoyt St. Clair Greeson, Jr., ‘Two Old English Observance Poems: <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi> and
                        <hi rend="italic">The Menologium—</hi>An Edition’ (unpub. thesis, Univ. of Oregon, 1970); the other is Chadwick Buford Hilton, Jr., ‘An Edition and Study of the Old
                    English <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>’ (unpub. thesis, Univ. of Tennessee, 1984). A new scholarly edition with commentary has been announced by Mary P. Richards. In
                    the meantime, I cite Christopher A. Jones (ed. and trans.), <hi rend="italic">Old English Shorter Poems I: Religious and Didactic</hi> (Cambridge, MA, 2012), 156–73.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN2">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">2</hi> For the date and origin of Otho B.xi, see N. R. Ker, <hi rend="italic">Catalogue of Manuscripts Containing Anglo-Saxon</hi> (Oxford, 1957), 230–4 (no. 180).
                    Nowell’s transcription is analysed in detail by Roland Torkar, <hi rend="italic">Eine altenglische Übersetzung von Alcuins De virtute et vitiis Kap. 20</hi> (Munich, 1981),
                    37–162. Before the Ashburnham fire, brief excerpts from the copy of the poem in Otho B.xi were also published by Humphrey Wanley and Abraham Wheloc; on these, see Mary P.
                    Richards, ‘Old Wine in a New Bottle: Recycled Instructional Materials in <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>’, in A. J. Kleist (ed.), <hi rend="italic">The Old English Homily:
                        Precedent, Practice, and Appropriation</hi> (Turnhout, 2007), 345–64, at 346.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN3">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">3</hi> On Nowell as a copyist and silent emender, see Torkar, <hi rend="italic">Eine altenglische Übersetzung</hi>, 162–7; on errors probably already in the medieval
                    copy, see Kenneth Sisam, <hi rend="italic">Studies in the History of Old English Literature</hi> (Oxford, 1953), 59–60.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN4">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi> The most important include L. Whitbread, ‘Notes on the “Seasons for Fasting” ’, <hi rend="italic">N&amp;Q</hi>, cxci (1946), 249–52; Holthausen,
                    ‘Ein altenglisches Gedicht’; Sisam, <hi rend="italic">Studies</hi>, 50–9; Roy F. Leslie, ‘Textual Notes on <hi rend="italic">The Seasons for Fasting</hi>’,
                        <hi rend="italic">JEGP</hi>, lii (1953), 555–8; Hans Schabram, ‘Zur Interpretation der 18. Strophe des altenglischen Gedichts <hi rend="italic">The Seasons for
                    Fasting</hi>’, <hi rend="italic">Anglia</hi>, cx (1992), 296–306. See also further studies by Whitbread and Schabram, cited at note 12, below.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN5">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi> The lacuna was already present when Nowell came across the poem, and the amount of missing text is impossible to determine; see Torkar, <hi rend="italic">Eine altenglische
                        Übersetzung</hi>, 141.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN6">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi> E.g., Sisam, <hi rend="italic">Studies</hi>, 45 and 60; E. G. Stanley, ‘Old English Poetic Vocabulary: “The formal word precise but not pedantic” ’,
                    in L. C. Gruber (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Essays on Old, Middle, Modern English and Old Icelandic in Honor of Raymond J. Tripp, Jr.</hi> (Lewiston, 2000), 177–200, at 178. On the
                    ‘prosaicism’ of the poem, see especially Mary P. Richards, ‘Prosaic Poetry: Late Old English Poetic Composition’, in J. Hall, N. Doane, and D. Ringler
                    (eds), <hi rend="italic">Old English and New: Studies in Language and Linguistics in Honor of Frederick G. Cassidy</hi> (New York and London, 1992), 63–75, at 64–8.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN7">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi> On the verbal and structural ‘artistry’ of the poem, the fullest analysis to date is Greeson, ‘Two Old English Observance Poems’,
                    39–71.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN8">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi> Richards, ‘Old Wine in a New Bottle’, 349–59.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN9">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi> Richards, ‘Old Wine in a New Bottle’, 359–62, anticipated in some points by Greeson, ‘Two Old English Observance Poems’, 34–8; and
                    Chadwick B. Hilton, ‘The Old English <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi>: Its Place in the Vernacular Complaint Tradition’, <hi rend="italic">Neophilologus</hi>, lxx (1986),
                    155–9, at 157. See also Hugh Magennis, <hi rend="italic">Anglo-Saxon Appetites: Food and Drink and their Consumption in Old English and Related Literature</hi> (Dublin, 1999),
                    93–4.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN10">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi> Jones (ed. and trans.), <hi rend="italic">Old English Shorter Poems</hi>, 170–1.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN11">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi> Sisam, <hi rend="italic">Studies</hi>, 56–7, and Leslie, ‘Textual Notes’, 557, both restoring at 206b Nowell’s half-line that Dobbie had emended to
                        <hi rend="italic">oððe þæt dæghluttre</hi>.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN12">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi> Hans Schabram, ‘<hi rend="italic">The Seasons for Fasting</hi> 206f. Mit einem Beitrag zur ae. Metrik’, in W. Iser and H. Schabram (eds), <hi rend="italic">Britannica:
                        Festschrift für Hermann M. Flasdieck</hi> (Heidelberg, 1960), 221–40, at 225–7; L. Whitbread, ‘Four Notes on Old English Poems’,
                        <hi rend="italic">English Studies</hi>, xliv (1963), 187–90, at 189–90. Both accept Sisam’s and Leslie’s readings of lines 206–7 and reject
                    Holthausen’s suggestion that the biblical echo is of Ps. 110 (Vulgate 109):7. For Gregory’s Latin, see Bruno Judic, Floribert Rommel, and Charles Morel (eds and trans),
                        <hi rend="italic">Grégoire le Grand: Règle pastorale</hi>, 2 vols. (Paris, 1992), I, 134.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN13">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi> On the poet’s adaptation of the allegory, see Greeson, ‘Two Old English Observance Poems’, 248–9. For <hi rend="italic">folces mann</hi> as
                    ‘layman’ (cf. also <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 212b), see Antonette diPaolo Healey <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (eds), <hi rend="italic">Dictionary of Old English: A–G
                        Online</hi> (Toronto, 2007), s.v. <hi rend="italic">folc</hi>, sense 6.a.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN14">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi> Jones (ed. and trans.), <hi rend="italic">Old English Shorter Poems</hi>, 168 and 170, where there is an unnecessary comma after 198b, deleted from the quotation above.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN15">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">15</hi> Sisam, <hi rend="italic">Studies</hi>, 56. Greeson, ‘Two Old English Observance Poems’, 245, construes the line as Sisam does; Hilton, ‘An Edition and
                    Study’, 78, repeats the older interpretations of Dobbie and Holthausen.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN16">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">16</hi> Slightly adapted from Jones (ed. and trans.), <hi rend="italic">Old English Shorter Poems</hi>, 169 and 171.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN17">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">17</hi> Mary P. Richards, ‘The Sources of <hi rend="italic">Seasons for Fasting</hi> (Cameron A.31)’, 2001, <hi rend="italic">Fontes Anglo-Saxonici: World Wide Web
                        Register</hi>, at &lt;<ref type="uri" target="http://fontes.english.ox.ac.uk/">http://fontes.english.ox.ac.uk/</ref>&gt;, last accessed May 2012. For the ‘possible direct source’ there indicated, see Roger Fowler (ed.),
                        <hi rend="italic">Wulfstan’s Canons of Edgar</hi>, EETS o.s. 266 (London, 1972), 3 (Canon 1).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN18">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">18</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> i.10, ll. 23–39; see Judic, Rommel, and Morel (eds), <hi rend="italic">Règle pastorale</hi>, I, 162 and 164. The attached translation is
                    my own.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN19">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">19</hi> Cf. the note on this passage in Judic, Rommel, and Morel (eds), <hi rend="italic">Règle pastorale</hi>, I, 162–3. Gregory repeated the analogy in similar
                    language in a letter preserved in John the Deacon’s <hi rend="italic">Vita S. Gregorii magni</hi> ii.3 (PL lxxv: 89A–B).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN20">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">20</hi> ‘Old Wine in a New Bottle’, 360 and note 49.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN21">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">21</hi> Schabram, ‘<hi rend="italic">The Seasons for Fasting</hi> 206f.’, 226–8. In his commentary to lines 206–7, Greeson also quotes from the Old English
                    prose translation of the <hi rend="italic">Regula pastoralis</hi> without explicitly claiming that the poet’s knowledge of Gregory was mediated thereby (‘Two Old English
                    Observance Poems’, 248–50).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN22">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">22</hi> Henry Sweet (ed. and trans.), <hi rend="italic">King Alfred’s West-Saxon Version of Gregory’s Pastoral Care</hi>, 2 vols., EETS o.s. 45 and 50 (London, 1871;
                    reprint 1958), I, 63. I quote the version from Oxford, Bodleian Library, Hatton 20, but, for this passage, there are no major differences between it and the version from London,
                    British Library, Cotton Tiberius B.xi, printed en face by Sweet. I have omitted Sweet’s accents, adjusted his punctuation slightly, and omitted one <hi rend="italic">se</hi> that
                    he marked as redundant in the fourth sentence.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN23">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">23</hi> This is my translation, though I have consulted Sweet’s (see previous note).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN24">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">24</hi> See Healey <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (eds), <hi rend="italic">Dictionary of Old English: A–G Online</hi>, s.v. <hi rend="italic">forwyrcan</hi>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>, sense
                    B.3.b.ii.a.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN25">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">25</hi> See <hi rend="italic">Seasons</hi> 45–6 and 92–100; cf. Whitbread, ‘Four Notes’, 189.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN26">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">26</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">Liber scintillarum</hi>, xxxii.59; see Henri M. Rochais (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Defensoris Locogiacensis monachi Liber scintillarum</hi>, CCSL cxvii (Turnhout, 1957),
                    128.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN27">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">27</hi> See note 9, above.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN28">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">28</hi> Printed as <hi rend="italic">Concilium Aquisgranense</hi>. <hi rend="italic">816. (mensibus Augusto et Septembri)</hi>, in Albert Werminghoff (ed.), MGH Concilia II.1 [Concilia
                    aevi Karolini I, pars 1] (Hannover and Leipzig, 1906), 307–464. The MGH text is numbered as 145 consecutive chapters divided into three sections: <hi rend="italic">capitula</hi>
                    (capp. 1–38), <hi rend="italic">canones</hi> (capp. 39–113), and a <hi rend="italic">regula canonicorum</hi> (capp. 114–45).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN29">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">29</hi> Werminghoff (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Concilium Aquisgranense</hi>, 338 and 348.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN30">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">30</hi> Werminghoff (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Concilium Aquisgranense</hi>, 364, 369 and 366, respectively.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN31">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">31</hi> Richards, ‘Old Wine in a New Bottle’, 349 and 353–9.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs157-FN32">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">32</hi> See Helmut Gneuss, <hi rend="italic">Handlist of Anglo-Saxon Manuscripts: A List of Manuscripts and Manuscript Fragments Written or Owned in England up to 1100</hi> (Tempe,
                    AZ, 2001), 35 (no. 73) and 141–2 (no. 925); see also Patrick Wormald, <hi rend="italic">The Making of English Law: King Alfred to the Twelfth Century. Vol. I: Legislation and Its
                        Limits</hi> (Oxford, 1999), 222. The final chapter (cap. 145) of the Aachen <hi rend="italic">Institutio</hi> has long been recognized as an important source for a number of
                    Wulfstanian homilies, e.g. item X(a) in Dorothy Bethurum (ed.), <hi rend="italic">The Homilies of Wulfstan</hi> (Oxford, 1957), 192–3; on further connections between Aachen 816 and
                    Wulfstanian compositions, see J.E. Cross, ‘A Newly-Identified Manuscript of Wulfstan’s “Commonplace Book”, Rouen, Bibliothèque Municipale, MS 1382
                    (U.109), fols. 173r–198v’, <hi rend="italic">Journal of Medieval Latin</hi>, ii (1992), 63–83, at 70–1 and 80–2.</p>
            </note>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
