<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="EN">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">A Controversy over Rhyme and Authorship in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>
            </title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
            <availability>
               <p>© The Author (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
                    journals.permissions@oup.com</p>
            </availability>
            <date>2012</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct type="article">
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <surname>Klause</surname>
                        <forename type="first">John</forename>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">A Controversy over Rhyme and Authorship in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>
                  </title>
                  <idno type="articleId"/>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Notes and Queries</title>
                  <title level="j" type="publisher-id">notesj</title>
                  <title level="j" type="hwp">notesj</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0029-3970</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1471-6941</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
                     <date type="Published" when="2012-12"/>
                     <date type="ePublished" when="2012-10-19"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">59</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="538">538</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="544">544</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1093/notesj/gjs158</idno>
               <idno type="publisherID">gjs158</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>MACDONALD JACKSON attempts in his book-length study of the authorship of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>
            <ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN1">
               <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
            </ref> to demonstrate the ‘dual
            authorship’ of the play, and then to identify the authors as George Wilkins and William Shakespeare. Jackson believes that a study of rhyme can help to establish these conclusions,
            and this conviction has led to a disagreement between us that has emerged in articles in <hi rend="italic">Notes and Queries</hi> on the subject of ‘rhyme and authorship’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN2">
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
            </ref> In responding to my essay, Jackson acknowledges that he has mistakenly claimed ‘uniqueness or near uniqueness’ of some
            rhyme-links between <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II and Wilkins’ <hi rend="italic">Miseries of Enforced Marriage</hi>; and his own research has led him to withdraw the claim that the
            ‘high-rhyming, assonant, rifted, rafted style’ found in the first two Acts of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> is the ‘trademark’ of Wilkins (‘Rhymes and
            Authors’, 264–5). For the most part, however, Jackson defends the arguments and conclusions of his book; and his defence requires serious examination.</p>
         <p>I contend that rhyme of itself is not a sign that different authors composed the two ‘parts’ of the play as it has come to be divided. When one calculates the ratio of all
            rhymed to verse lines in <hi rend="italic">Pericles,</hi> the results are similar: 31 per cent for Acts I–II (281/903), 25 per cent for Acts III–V (260/1032).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN3">
               <hi rend="superscript">3</hi>
            </ref> But Jackson finds reason to exclude evidence. Not all rhymes should be counted, he argues, only those that appear in verse-dialogue. After this
            exclusion, the figures (based on the numbers of E. K. Chambers, who considerably undercounted the extra-choral rhymes in III–IV) are much different: 25 per cent for I–II, vs. 3
            per cent for III–V.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN4">
               <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
            </ref> Do these radically disparate percentages by themselves demonstrate dual authorship? They do not. There is
            no reason to privilege percentages based on truncation over those that are not. The scaled-back numbers eliminate from consideration 85 per cent of the rhymed lines in Acts III–V
            (222 out of 260)—all of them lines spoken by Gower, not ‘external’ verses (as Chambers called them) but lines essential to the play’s story. The speeches containing
            them were probably written by the author responsible for the rest of the verse in the final three Acts. In studying the rhymes-to-verses ratio in <hi rend="italic">Hamlet</hi>, should one
            eliminate the ‘external’ verses of the Player’s speech and of the ‘Mousetrap’? In considering the rhyme patterns of <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi>, should
            one ignore the ‘external’ sonnet-prologues of Acts I and II while taking into account the ‘internal’ sonnet-rhymes in I.v? (It should be noted that Chambers made
            the distinction primarily to highlight differences in meter, not in rhyme.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN5">
               <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
            </ref>) Jackson claims that adding Gower’s rhymes to those
            in the dialogue ‘simply blurs a crucial stylistic distinction between two ‘halves’ of the play’ (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 262). I would say that in each
            ‘half’ of the play the stylistic relationship of the choral lines to the dialogue-verses is essentially the same, and that Gower’s share of the verse in the second half
            is much greater (225 lines in III–V vs. 82 in I–II) because in the latter part, by the very nature of his tale, greater resort to narration is needed. Mere numbers in this case
            cannot reliably distinguish between different authors.</p>
         <p>Bringing Shakespeare into the picture does not change matters. Jackson assumes that the verse-dialogue rhyming rate of ‘3 per cent’ (5 per cent, in fact) associates
                <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V with Shakespeare’s practice in the later tragedies and the other romances, written at the same stage of his career.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN6">
               <hi rend="superscript">6</hi>
            </ref> Only one other play in the canon, however, <hi rend="italic">Henry V</hi>, features a Chorus whose rhymes constitute, as they do in III–V, as much
            as 85 per cent of the total. In this respect, the writing in these Acts is not really comparable with that of the late Shakespeare.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN7">
               <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
            </ref>
            On the other hand, Jackson claims that ‘there is no play by Shakespeare alone in which two consecutive Acts have as many as 25 per cent of verse-dialogue lines rhymed while remaining
            Acts have as few as 3 per cent’. Yet, as already suggested, there are different ways of approaching the problem of percentages. Much of the discrepancy disappears when all rhymes are
            considered: the ‘amounts of rhyme’ are no longer, as Jackson asserts, ‘wildly different’ (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 261). But even if one were to take into
            account only verse-dialogue, at least two plays ‘by Shakespeare alone’ show a significant divergence in rhyming between two consecutive Acts and the other three: <hi rend="italic">The
                Merchant of Venice</hi> and <hi rend="italic">King Lear</hi> (1608 Quarto text).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN8">
               <hi rend="superscript">8</hi>
            </ref> This variance shows itself first in the absolute
            number of rhymed lines in the dialogue: 132 in <hi rend="italic">Merchant</hi>, I–III, and 18 in IV–V; 139 in <hi rend="italic">Lear</hi>, I–III, and 22 in IV–V; compare 199 in
                <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II, and 38 in III–V. In each of these plays, there is more than an 80 per cent difference in rhyming lines between three contiguous Acts and
            the other two Acts. Since, however, Acts may vary considerably in size, it is necessary to secure the bases of comparison by considering the ratios of rhymed lines in the dialogue of each
            part in relation to the total number of verse lines in that dialogue. The results are as follows: <list type="simple">
               <item>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">Per</hi>, I–II: 24 per cent; <hi rend="italic">Per</hi>, III–V: 5 per cent (or, 199/821; 38/807)</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">MV</hi>, I–III: 10 per cent; <hi rend="italic">MV</hi>, IV–V: 2 per cent (or, 132/1273; 18/756)</p>
               </item>
               <item>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">Lr</hi>, I–III: 10 per cent, <hi rend="italic">Lr</hi>; IV–V: 2 per cent (or, 139/1345; 22/1010)</p>
               </item>
            </list> Thus the ‘discrepancy’ in rhyming practices between the divided parts of the three plays, two of which are, no one would doubt, entirely by Shakespeare, is virtually
            the same: in each work, the percentage of rhymed lines per verses is approximately five times greater in one part than in the other. The comparison shows that a large disparity in the
            number of lines rhymed in two parts of a play need not be a sign of dual authorship, and need not exclude the possibility of authorship by Shakespeare.</p>
         <p>Analysing the numerical distinctions above with the chi-square test, a form of statistical analysis that Jackson often employs, one would conclude that the two parts of
                <hi rend="italic">Merchant</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Lear</hi>, as well as of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, belong to different ‘populations’ (by different authors?)—as is
            evidently not the case.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN9">
               <hi rend="superscript">9</hi>
            </ref> The test fails in this situation, as it would in others, because it is applied to rhymes, which are not
            demonstrably (as is assumed with chi-square tests) random variables with approximately normal probability distributions.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN10">
               <hi rend="superscript">10</hi>
            </ref> Each
            rhyme is the product of conscious choice; the frequency and placement of rhymes are also at some level consciously chosen. It is clear that Shakespeare decided at times to distribute his
            rhymes with great unevenness in some of his plays, in a way that would not disqualify him from the authorship of both parts of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>.</p>
         <p>Jackson is concerned not only with rhyming in general, but with a specific rhyming vocabulary shared by Wilkins in his ‘sole unaided play’, <hi rend="italic">The Miseries of Enforced
                Marriage</hi>, with the author(s) of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>. Finding in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II 21 different rhymes (‘types’) that appear in
                <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, and only six such rhymes in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V (by Shakespeare), Jackson believes that ‘this very large discrepancy’
            strengthens the case that he has made on other grounds ‘against Shakespeare’s authorship of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II’ (‘Rhymes and Authors’,
            262). The first part of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> shares 15.7 per cent of its types (21 rhymes out of a total of 134) with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>; the second part, only 4.5 per cent (6
            out of a total of 133).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN11">
               <hi rend="superscript">11</hi>
            </ref> By this reasoning, however, <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi> would also seem to be co-authored, showing a
            similar discrepancy: Acts I–II of <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> share twenty-two rhymes (types) with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, and Acts III–V share four, a difference between 13.8
            per cent (22/160) and 4.8 per cent (4/84):</p>
         <p>
            <figure type="table" xml:id="T1">
               <ab>
                  <table>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Alone</hi>/<hi rend="italic">one</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.6</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Attend</hi>/<hi rend="italic">mend</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1 Chor</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Be</hi>/<hi rend="italic">me</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.3</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Bed</hi>/<hi rend="italic">head</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.3</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Book(s)</hi>/<hi rend="italic">look(s)</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.2</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Buried</hi>/<hi rend="italic">dead</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 4.5 and 5.3</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Dead</hi>/<hi rend="italic">lead</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.5</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Die</hi>/<hi rend="italic">eye</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.2 (2x)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Die</hi>/<hi rend="italic">fly</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 3.1</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">Die/<hi rend="italic">lie</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2 Chor</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Do</hi>/<hi rend="italic">too</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.5</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Eye(s)</hi>/<hi rend="italic">lie(s)</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.3 and 2.3 (2×)</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Give</hi>/<hi rend="italic">live</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.3 and 3.1</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Heart</hi>/<hi rend="italic">part</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.2 and 2.3</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Ill</hi>/<hi rend="italic">will</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.1 and 4.5</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(6× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Kin</hi>/<hi rend="italic">sin</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.5(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Kiss</hi>/<hi rend="italic">this</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.5 (2×)</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(4× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Men</hi>/<hi rend="italic">then</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.3(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">More</hi>/<hi rend="italic">store</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.2</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">None</hi>/<hi rend="italic">one</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.2</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Poor</hi>/<hi rend="italic">store</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.1</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Still</hi>/<hi rend="italic">will</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.1, 2.3</cell>
                        <cell role="td">(2× in MEM)</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">Taste</hi>/<hi rend="italic">waste</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 2.3</cell>
                     </row>
                     <row>
                        <cell role="td">
                           <hi rend="italic">True</hi>/<hi rend="italic">you</hi>:</cell>
                        <cell role="td">RJ, 1.4</cell>
                     </row>
                  </table>
               </ab>
               <table/>
            </figure>
         </p>
         <div>
            <head/>
            <div>
               <head>Rhymes shared by <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi> with <hi rend="italic">The Miseries of Enforced Marriage</hi>
               </head>
               <div>
                  <head>
                     <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>:</head>
                  <p>Taking into account rhymed ‘tokens’ (i.e. all instances of the different rhymes, including repetitions), one could come to the same conclusion about <hi rend="italic">Romeo
                            and Juliet</hi>’s co-authorship. <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II shares 28 of its 174 tokens (22 rhymes + 6 repeats) with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, and
                            <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, III–V shares 5 of its 88 (4 rhymes + 1 repeat), a discrepancy between 16.1 per cent and 5.7 percent—comparable to
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II, which shares 26 of 146 tokens (21 rhymes + 5 repeats) with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>,
                        III–V, which shares 6 of 135 (6 rhymes and no repeats), a difference between 17.8 per cent and 4.4 per cent.</p>
                  <p>The repetitions of which I speak here are those which occur in <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi> and in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, and they show that the rhyming lexicon of
                            <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> is used in each of those two plays in a similar pattern. If repetition suggests a writer’s predilection for a rhyme, how are Wilkins’
                        predilections, as shown in the repeated rhymes of <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, to be compared with those of the author(s) of <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>?
                        Jackson does not in <hi rend="italic">Defining Shakespeare</hi> make a direct comparison. He creates what he terms ‘links’ between the rhymes in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>
                        and those of the other plays by multiplying the number of instances of each shared rhyme (2 occurrences of <hi rend="italic">life/wife</hi> in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II
                        × 6 in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> = 12 links), adding up the number of links between <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and each of the other plays or parts of plays,
                        dividing each sum by the number of rhymes in each play or part, and comparing the quotients (see <hi rend="italic">Defining Shakespeare</hi>, 103). I have questioned this procedure,
                        suggesting that the numbers so generated offer no definite insight into the rhyming practices of different authors (‘Rhyme and Authorship’, 396–97), and
                        Jackson has given only a brief reply to my objection, saying that his method is consistently applied and that it recognizes the necessity of considering tokens as well as types
                        (‘Rhyme and Authorship’, 263). One can apply my argument to the case of <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi>. In his book, Jackson reports fifty-eight multiplied
                        rhyming links between <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II, at a ratio to all rhyme-tokens in I–II of 40.0 per cent; and fifty-five such
                        links (59, by my count) between <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, at a ratio of 21.7 per cent (<hi rend="italic">Defining Shakespeare</hi>, 103). This discrepancy
                        is indeed large, but its meaning is indeterminate. <hi rend="italic">Kiss/this</hi> contributes two rhymes to the total shared by <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and
                        <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II, four to the total shared by <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II, and the totals may be meaningfully
                        compared. The product ‘eight’, the number of links, is a single quantity that applies to nothing in either play and elides the differences that make for a proper
                        comparison, as may be shown.</p>
                  <p>There is a great disparity in the outcomes produced by the two schemes of computation. In Method A, when sums of rhyme-tokens in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> are compared, the ratios of rhymes shared with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> to all rhymes in the two ‘parts’ of the target plays are, as
                        noted above, negligibly different: <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II, 16.1 per cent; Pericles, I–II, 17.8 per cent; <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, III–V, 5.7 per cent;
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V, 4.4 per cent. In Method B, the multiplication of token numbers across the plays produces a markedly dissimilar result, with the
                        ratios of links per rhyme-tokens being: <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II, 27.6 per cent (48/174); <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II, 39.7 per cent (58/146);
                            <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, III–V, 12.5 per cent (11/88); <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V, 9.6 per cent (13/135). The reasons for the differences are not difficult
                        to perceive. The numerators, in determining the percentages, change from sums to the sums of products, and the denominators do not.</p>
                  <p>But what is the effect of the changes, and which method offers a truer picture of rhyming practices? Both procedures make use of links (differently calculated); both take into
                        account repetitions. But Method B, employed by Jackson, does not in fact indicate the authors’ relative rhyming preferences, as we can see from the following
                        illustration. The rhyme <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi> occurs on a percentage basis three times more often in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> than in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II (6
                        instances out of 296 rhymes = 2.0 per cent; 1/174 = 0.6 per cent). Method A proceeds in a way that takes the difference into account. Method B disguises the
                        difference by conflating the numbers that reveal it. A single instance of <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi> in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II now contributes to 6 links that the
                        text is said to have with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, the numerators becoming the same in the ratio of links (not rhymes) to rhyme-tokens (6/174 = 3.4 per cent; 6/296
                        = 2.0 per cent). With a much smaller relative frequency of occurrence in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II than in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> (as indicated in Method A),
                            <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi> shows a larger percentage of links (as defined in Method B) between the two works. Whatever ‘links’ may mean in this case, they reveal
                        nothing about comparative rhyming preference. Similarly, comparing appearances of <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi> in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>,
                        I–II shows that it appears with the same frequency in both texts (6/296 = 2.0 per cent; 3/146 = 2.1 per cent); but the sameness becomes a distinct
                        difference in the ratio of links (6 × 3) to rhyme-tokens (18/296 = 6.1 per cent; 18/146 = 12.3 per cent).</p>
                  <p>In Method B, <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi>, one rhyme-type out of twenty-one shared is made to account for 31 per cent (18/58) of all the links between <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II. Two rhyme-types, <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi> and <hi rend="italic">life/wife</hi>, account for over 50 per cent (30/58).</p>
                  <p>According to this method, if a text <hi rend="italic">X</hi> and a text <hi rend="italic">Y</hi> both contain 400 rhymes, but <hi rend="italic">X</hi> has two instances of
                            <hi rend="italic">hay/day</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Y</hi> has twenty, each would contain the same ratio of links to rhymes, 40/400, though in one text <hi rend="italic">hay/day</hi>
                        appeared ten times more frequently than in the other.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN12">
                        <hi rend="superscript">12</hi>
                     </ref> Is this better than Method A as a means to represent and compare
                        authorial practice in the use of rhyme?</p>
                  <p>Method A also has its limitations. If a play, <hi rend="italic">The Agony</hi>, with 200 rhyme-tokens has ten rhyme-types in common with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, each type occurring
                        four times in <hi rend="italic">The Agony</hi>, it exhibits the same percentage of shared to all rhyme-tokens, 40/200 or 20 per cent, as does another play, <hi rend="italic">The
                            Ecstasy</hi>, also with 200 rhyme tokens, which had forty rhyme-types shared with <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, but none repeated. Thus it is interesting that Jackson, in
                        ‘Rhymes and Authors’ (264), takes up the matter of rhyming preferences in a different way. Confining his attention first to specific rhymes that occur more than
                        twice in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, he finds that there are six instances of such favored rhymes in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II (based on <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi>,
                            <hi rend="italic">kiss/this</hi>, <hi rend="italic">life/wife</hi>) and four instances in all of <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> (based on <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi>,
                        <hi rend="italic">kiss/this</hi>), revealing a discrepancy in the rate of occurrence. According to his counts, the difference is between a rate of 4.1 per cent (6/145) for
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II and 1.6 per cent (4/254) for all of <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN13">
                        <hi rend="superscript">13</hi>
                     </ref> Wilkins’
                        favourites, then, are more favoured in the first two Acts of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> than in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>. But not quite in the way and to the extent that Jackson
                        suggests. There is always a statistical hazard in making use of such small numbers. Nevertheless, comparing <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II with <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>,
                        I–II instead of with the entire play, and considering the rhymes individually, one can see that <hi rend="italic">ill/will</hi> is more favoured in the first part of
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> (3/146 = 2.1 per cent; 1/174 = 0.6 per cent, but that <hi rend="italic">kiss/this</hi> is preferred in the first part of
                            <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> (2/174 = 1.1 per cent; 1/146 = 0.7 per cent). <hi rend="italic">Life/wife</hi> breaks the ‘draw’, appearing twice in
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II and not at all in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>. This is hardly a decisive victory. The two occurrences of this rhyme in
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II show it to be less favoured here than in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, with its six instances (2/146 = 1.4 per cent; 6/296
                        = 2.0 per cent). <hi rend="italic">Life/wife</hi> appears also, once, in the Shakespearian <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V; and on occasion elsewhere Shakespeare can
                        show a stronger predilection for it than is evinced in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II, using it twice in a single scene of <hi rend="italic">Comedy of Errors</hi> (III.ii),
                        and twice in a single <hi rend="italic">stanza</hi> of <hi rend="italic">Lucrece</hi> (1800–1806). Jackson does not compare the rates of occurrence in the first parts of
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> of rhymes that appear at least twice in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>. This larger number of Wilkins’ favourites is
                        in fact used with equal frequency in both of the other texts: 12 times in the 174 rhymes in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II (6.9 per cent); 10 times in the 146 rhymes in
                            <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II (6.8 per cent), with similar distribution of single appearances and repeats: in the first part of <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, 5 one-rhyme,
                        2 two-rhyme, and 1 three-rhyme instances; in the first part of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, 3 one-rhyme, 2 two-rhyme, and 1 three-rhyme instances.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN14">
                        <hi rend="superscript">14</hi>
                     </ref>
                  </p>
                  <p>The conclusion of this analysis must be, of course, not that both <hi rend="italic">Romeo and Juliet</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi> were written by two authors, one of whom may
                        have been in each case George Wilkins, but that rhyming patterns are untrustworthy markers of authorship.</p>
                  <p>Another problem brought into focus by Jackson in his response to my article is the likelihood, or even the inevitability, that readers will disagree on whether certain
                        word-doublets in fact constitute rhymes. Jackson and I are at odds, for example, over some assonantal rhymes that may or may not interrupt or be interrupted by blank verse
                        (‘rafts’ or ‘rifts’).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN15">
                        <hi rend="superscript">15</hi>
                     </ref> Jackson is also certain that <hi rend="italic">him</hi> rhymes with
                            <hi rend="italic">sin</hi> in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, but not, as I claim, in <hi rend="italic">Measure for Measure</hi>. The passage in dispute appears at the end of
                            <hi rend="italic">Measure</hi>, IV.i: <cit>
                        <quote>
                           <p>To bring you thus together ‘tis no sin,</p>
                           <p>Sith that the justice of your title to him</p>
                           <p>Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go,</p>
                           <p>Our corn’s to reap, for yet our tithe’s to sow. (72–75)</p>
                        </quote>
                     </cit> Jackson’s criteria for a rhyme include a stress on the words in question (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 263) and placement ‘at a position in a
                        speech or scene in which rhyme is often used’ (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 266). I believe that both requirements are satisfied in this case. <hi rend="italic">Him</hi>
                        is, like <hi rend="italic">sin</hi>, indeed stressed, after an unmarked elision (‘t’ him’); otherwise, the accent would fall awkwardly on the preposition, and the
                        line would contain an unnecessary syllable. Furthermore, the rhyming pattern evident here appears elsewhere in the play at the end of scenes (cf.
                            <hi rend="italic">die/chastity/request/rest</hi> [II.iv]; <hi rend="italic">incline/mine/show/know</hi> [V.i]); and the end of a scene is in general ‘a position … in which
                        rhyme is often used’. It might also be noted that Shakespeare rhymes <hi rend="italic">win</hi> with <hi rend="italic">him</hi> assonantally in lines of a song at a scene’s end
                            (<hi rend="italic">win/him/speak/break</hi>) (<hi rend="italic">Troilus</hi>, III.iii.212–13). Of the twelve assonantal rhymes in Shakespeare’s plays that I add to the list
                        of D. J. Lake (‘Rhyme and Authorship’, 399–400), Jackson, as is his right, doubts all but one of them. But of the eleven questioned, Helge Kökeritz, in
                            <hi rend="italic">Shakespeare’s Pronunciation</hi>,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs158-FN16">
                        <hi rend="superscript">16</hi>
                     </ref> records eight; a ninth is <hi rend="italic">him/sin</hi>, for which
                        I’ve argued; and a tenth, <hi rend="italic">doom/gone</hi> is conceded by Jackson to be ‘possible’ (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 265–6). Since
                        Kökeritz’s inventory is the basis for all of the figures about rhymes given in Jackson’s study (<hi rend="italic">Defining Shakespeare</hi>, 99; ‘Rhymes and
                        Authors’, 263), it is surprising to see in this case such widespread disagreement with an essential source, whose judgements Jackson nowhere else disputes on such a
                        scale.</p>
                  <p>That some rhymes (though certainly not most) are so difficult to agree upon compromises their effectiveness in the investigation of authorship, adding to doubts already raised
                        that rhyming practice by itself can distinguish and identify authors in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>. MacDonald Jackson’s studies have taken many paths in his attempt to
                        show that the hand of George Wilkins may be seen in this play; but his analysis of rhymes has contributed much less to the process of proof than he has proposed.</p>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="fn-group">
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN1">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">Defining Shakespeare: Pericles as Test Case</hi> (Oxford, 2003).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN2">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">2</hi> John Klause, ‘Rhyme and the Authorship of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>’, <hi rend="italic">N&amp;Q</hi>, cclv (2010), 395–400; MacD. P. Jackson, ‘Rhymes
                    and Authors: Shakespeare, Wilkins, and <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>’, <hi rend="italic">N&amp;Q</hi>, cclvi (2011), 260–6.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN3">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">3</hi> These numbers are corrected slightly from those given in my previous essay, and are based on the arrangement and numbering of lines in <hi rend="italic">The Riverside
                        Shakespeare</hi>, ed. G. Blakemore Evans, <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi>, 2nd edn (Boston, 1997). Except where noted otherwise, all citations from Shakespeare’s works are
                    from this edition. In this essay, I use my own figures, except when specifically referring to numbers in Jackson’s own calculations.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN4">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi> See Jackson, ‘Rhymes and Authors’, 261. By my reckoning, the numbers should be 24 per cent (199/821) vs. 5 per cent (38/807). Chambers reported 22 instead
                    of 38 rhymed lines in the verse outside of the Gower Choruses and the Epilogue of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V. He also, unlike contemporary editors, assigned all of the
                    choral lines in the play and the Epilogue to ‘Non-Shakespeare’. See <hi rend="italic">William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems</hi> (Oxford, 1930), II, 403.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN5">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">Facts and Problems</hi>, II, 406: ‘I have placed in the column headed ‘External’ all prologues, epilogues, and choruses, the interludes and masks in
                        <hi rend="italic">M.N.D</hi>., <hi rend="italic">A.Y.L</hi>., <hi rend="italic">Ham.</hi>, <hi rend="italic">M.W.</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Mac.</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Cy.</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">Tp.</hi>, the
                    player’s speech in <hi rend="italic">Ham.</hi>, and the bombastic lines of Pistol in <hi rend="italic">2 Hen. IV</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Hen. V</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">M.W.</hi> The metrical
                    quality of these is naturally distinct from that of the plays in which they are related’. The rationale for Chambers’ division is not entirely clear. Equally
                    ‘distinct’ from their contexts are, for example, the ‘metrical qualities’ of ‘internal’ passages of verse from the casket scenes in
                        <hi rend="italic">MV</hi>, the tetrameter verse in <hi rend="italic">MM</hi>, the Fool’s and the disguised Edgar’s verse in <hi rend="italic">Lr</hi>, and the songs in various
                    plays.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN6">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi> The 5 per cent figure places <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V rather with plays ranging chronologically from <hi rend="italic">King John</hi> to <hi rend="italic">Measure for
                        Measure</hi>. See Stanley Wells, Gary Taylor, <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi>, <hi rend="italic">William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion</hi> (Oxford, 1987), 96.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN7">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi> It is of course possible that the whole play might be structurally in some respects entirely <hi rend="italic">sui generis</hi> for Shakespeare, so that the great number of
                    ‘speech-pause rhymes’ in <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II and their (arguable) absence in III–V need not require the hypothesis of dual authorship. See
                    Jackson, ‘Rhymes and Authors’, 261; Klause, ‘Rhyme and Authorship’, 399.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN8">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi> Analysis of the <hi rend="italic">Lear</hi> Quarto is here based on the Oxford edition of the text, as printed in <hi rend="italic">The Norton Shakespeare</hi>, ed. Stephen
                    Greenblatt, <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (New York, 1997).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN9">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi> The chi-square values (adjusted with the Yates correction) for <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Merchant</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">Lear</hi> are, respectively, 123.2,
                    43.1, and 59.0—all indicating a probability of less than 1 in 10,000 that the large deviations between the rhyme-to-verse ratios in the dialogue of the different
                    ‘parts’ of the plays are due to chance.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN10">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi> The importance of this consideration has been suggested to me by Thomas Merriam in personal correspondence.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN11">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi> See <hi rend="italic">Defining Shakespeare</hi>, 98–103, Tables 12–13. My count of the total number of rhyme-types and tokens is often slightly, not
                    significantly different from Jackson’s.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN12">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi> Jackson asserts that such an ‘extreme result’ would never occur with ‘any Shakespeare play’ (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 263), because
                    none has so many repeated rhymes. But with multiplied links, the extremity can come entirely or mostly from the ‘other’ compared play—as it does in the case of
                        <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi>, with its multipliers of 6, 6, and 4, which are larger than any furnished by <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi> or <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>. Besides, with
                    multiplied links, as has been shown, even less ‘extreme results’ can produce distortions.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN13">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi> See ‘Rhymes and Authors’, 264 and 264n 11.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN14">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi> Jackson also compares the rate of repetition of rhyme-<hi rend="italic">types</hi> appearing at least twice in <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> (8.5 per cent) with the rate in
                        <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, I–II (8.6 per cent), and distinguishes these similar percentages sharply from that for <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V (1.6 per cent),
                    closely associating <hi rend="italic">Miseries</hi> with the first part of <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, and dissociating it from the second part (‘Rhymes and Authors’, 265). He
                    does not note, however, that in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, I–II, repeated rhyme-types constitute 8.1 per cent of the total (13/160), and in <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, III–V,
                    4.8 per cent(4/84). The difference in percentages between <hi rend="italic">Pericles</hi>, III–V and <hi rend="italic">Romeo</hi>, III–V is due to a difference of less than 3
                    repeated rhymes.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN15">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">15</hi> Cf. ‘Rhyme and Authorship’, 397–400, and ‘Rhymes and Authors’, 261, 265–6.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs158-FN16">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">16</hi> New Haven, Yale University Press, 1953, Appendix 3.</p>
            </note>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
