<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="EN">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">Thomas Elyot’s ‘Wonderful History of Titus and Gisippus’ (1531) as a Source for William Walter’s <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gisippus</hi>
                    (1525?)</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
            <availability>
               <p>© The Author (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
                    journals.permissions@oup.com</p>
            </availability>
            <date>2012</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct type="article">
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <surname>Pincombe</surname>
                        <forename type="first">Mike</forename>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">Thomas Elyot’s ‘Wonderful History of Titus and Gisippus’ (1531) as a Source for William Walter’s <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gisippus</hi>
                    (1525?)</title>
                  <idno type="articleId"/>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Notes and Queries</title>
                  <title level="j" type="publisher-id">notesj</title>
                  <title level="j" type="hwp">notesj</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0029-3970</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1471-6941</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
                     <date type="Published" when="2012-12"/>
                     <date type="ePublished" when="2012-11-26"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">59</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="490">490</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="494">494</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1093/notesj/gjs178</idno>
               <idno type="publisherID">gjs178</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>TWO versions of the story of Titus and Gisippus appeared in print around 1530.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN1">
               <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
            </ref> One is Thomas Elyot’s ‘Wonderful History
            of Titus and Gisippus’, which is inserted towards the end of the second part of <hi rend="italic">The Book Named the Governor</hi>, first printed in 1531. The other is by William Walter,
            and was printed by Wynkyn de Worde with the following incipit-title: ‘Here beginneth the history of Titus and Gisippus, translated out of Latin into English by William Walter,
            sometime servant to sir Henry Marney, knight, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster’. This is a translation of Philippus Beroaldus’s <hi rend="italic">Mythica historia de Tito
                Gisippoque</hi>, probably in the edition of 1498; and Beroaldus’s <hi rend="italic">historia</hi> is itself a translation of the eighth tale of the last day of Boccaccio’s
                <hi rend="italic">Decameron</hi>.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN2">
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
            </ref> De Worde’s print of Walter’s version is not dated, but the <hi rend="italic">Short Title
                Catalogue</hi> tentatively suggests a year of ‘[1525?]’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN3">
               <hi rend="superscript">3</hi>
            </ref> However, the evidence of several passages from
            Walter’s <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gisippus</hi> suggest that he must have had a copy of <hi rend="italic">The Governor</hi> before him as he translated Beroaldus. Only a few examples will be
            necessary to argue the point, I hope, and I will chose them from the many passages noted as deviations from the Beroaldian text by the editor of Walter’s <hi rend="italic">Titus and
                Gisippus</hi>, Herbert Wright, in 1937. The first is meant to demonstrate the nature of the problem that faces us; the second two are intended to show a possible way forward.</p>
         <div>
            <head>I</head>
            <p>Beroaldus’s <hi rend="italic">Mythica historia</hi> begins thus: ‘Quo tempore Octavius Caesar nondum cognominatus Augustus in triumviratu Romanum tegebat imperium, fuit Romae P.
                Qu. Fulvius homo patricius ac nobilis’ [At the time that Octavius Caesar, not yet given the name Augustus, protected the Roman empire as a member of the triumvirate, there was in
                Rome a certain Publius Quintus Fulvius, a nobleman of the patrician order] (133). Walter renders this as follows: ‘What time in Rome reigned Octavian, | There was a senator
                called Fulvius’ (1–2). Wright notes that Walter has ‘Octavian’ rather than ‘Octavius’, not only because it provides a rhyme with
                ‘gentleman’ two lines later, but also because of a ‘desire for greater historical accuracy’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN4">
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
               </ref> True; but
                now look at how Elyot starts his version: ‘There was in the city of Rome a noble senator named Fulvius’ (166). Elyot omits all reference to Octavian, who appears later in
                the traditional telling of the story, but not in his own version. But see how both he and Walter reduce Beroaldus’s ‘P. Qu. Fulvius’ to the single name
                    ‘Fulvius’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN5">
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
               </ref> Some explanation is necessary here.</p>
            <p>In the <hi rend="italic">Decameron</hi>, Boccaccio writes: ‘Nel tempo adunque che Ottavian Cesare, non ancora chiamato Augusto ma nello uficio chiamato triumvirato lo ‘mperio di
                Roma reggeva, fu in Roma un gentile uomo chiamato Publio Quinzio Fulvo; il quale avendo un suo figliuolo, Tito Quinzio Fulvo nominato  … ’ [At the time that
                Octavian Caesar, not yet called Augustus, ruled of the empire of Rome in the office called the triumvirate, there was in Rome a gentleman called Publius Quintius Fulvus, who, having a
                son by the name of Titus Quintius Fulvus  …  ] (005). Father and son are thus distinguished by means of their <hi rend="italic">praenomina</hi>: Publio and Tito.
                Beroaldus translates Boccaccio’s ‘Fulvo’ as ‘Fulvius’, not ‘Fulvus’, because he shared Walter’s desire for historical accuracy. The
                Fulvii were a well-known <hi rend="italic">gens nobilis</hi> at the period in which Boccaccio sets his scene; but there was no such family as the ‘Fulvi’. But both Walter and
                Elyot seem to treat Fulvius as a <hi rend="italic">praenomen</hi>, as if it were Titus’s father’s given name, rather than one of his family names. It is quite possible that both
                English writers simply ignored the initials they saw in Beroaldus. Walter may well have felt that all those names might be hard to fit into a single line of verse. Similarly, the
                Polish translator of Beroaldus, Jan Stok of Wąchock, in 1564, simply called Titus’s father ‘Fulwius’, and the Hungarian writer, Gáspár Veres of
                Szeged, in 1577, simply called him ‘Publius’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN6">
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi>
               </ref> But Elyot, writing in prose, had no such excuse. And here we might be
                inclined to think that he may have read Walter, rather than that Walter had read him.</p>
            <p>But we also note that both Walter and Elyot describe Fulvius as a ‘senator’. In Boccaccio, Publio is simply ‘un gentil uomo’, but Beroaldus elevates him to the
                station of a ‘homo patricius ac nobilis’. Now the phrase <hi rend="italic">gentile uomo</hi> might mean either ‘gentleman’ or ‘nobleman’ (or ‘noble
                man’); so Beroaldus is not exactly ‘promoting’ Publio by describing him as <hi rend="italic">nobilis</hi>. Perhaps he had noted that Boccaccio’s Cremete
                (Gisippo’s father) was designated ‘un nobile uomo’ (006), and thought, since Cremete was Publio Quinzio Fulvo’s old friend (‘antichissimo suo
                amico’), they were probably of the same social status. But the word <hi rend="italic">patricius</hi> tells a slightly different story. Beroaldus knows that there was a special set of
                terms assigned to various social ranks in ancient Rome, and, since P. Qu. Fulvius was a <hi rend="italic">nobilis</hi>, he was thus also a <hi rend="italic">patricius</hi>, that is, he belonged to
                the class which produced the <hi rend="italic">patres</hi>: the senators. Walter probably knew this, and Elyot certainly did, for, in his <hi rend="italic">Dictionary</hi> (1538), the word
                    <hi rend="italic">patricius</hi> is glossed as ‘a senator’s son, or comen [<hi rend="italic">descended</hi>] of senators’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN7">
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
               </ref>
            </p>
            <p>In this case, we might wish to argue that Walter was following Elyot, for, in Walter, the word <hi rend="italic">senator</hi> is used here and here only, whereas Elyot completely rewrites
                Beroaldus in order to present Titus as a member of the senatorial class. When he addresses the nobility of Athens, Titus does not appeal to the glory of his ancestors, as he does in
                Beroaldus, but he does mention his personal connections with the present ruling class when he tells them he has been ‘called home by the desirous and importunate letters of mine
                allies and friends, which be of the most noble of all the senators, [and] offered the advancement to the highest dignities in the public weal’ (175). Soon after this, he leaves
                Athens, ‘being sent for by the authority of the senate and people of Rome’ (178); and when he arrives home he is joyfully received of his mother and kinsmen ‘and of
                all the senate and people’ (178). When Gisippus is brought to trial, it is not, as in Beroaldus, before the praetor Varro, but before the Senate, amongst whom we find
                ‘Titus, being than consul, or in other like dignity’ (181). In Beroaldus, Titus just happened to be passing by the court—‘by chance’ (164). In Elyot, it
                is the Senate that makes the decision to free Gisippus, Titus, and the murderer to whose crime each has confessed in the hope of saving the other; and it is ‘by the consent of
                the Senate and people’ (183) that Titus raises the army which he takes to Athens in order to restore Gisippus to his old dignity.</p>
            <p>Here the balance tips in Elyot’s favour. Walter cannot introduce changes on such a grand scale because he is translating Beroaldus much more closely than Elyot; but he sees the
                word ‘senator’ in the first line of Elyot’s version and inserts it gratefully into his own verse—perhaps with a nod also to Elyot’s ‘Fulvius’.
                But, of course, he may just as well have seen the word <hi rend="italic">patricius</hi> and translated it directly as ‘senator’. The balance of probability may favour Elyot
                here—and yet it is still not really convincing. Wright was not impressed with Walter’s command of Latin, and quotes several passages where he seems simply not to have
                understood what Beroaldus had written. But we should probably give him the benefit of the doubt where we can, rather than privileging our certain knowledge of Elyot’s
                considerable erudition.</p>
         </div>
         <div>
            <head>II</head>
            <p>Turning to our second example, we encounter a very different situation. Those who know their Boccaccio will have been surprised to learn that Elyot’s Titus raises an army and
                takes Gisippus back to Athens. In Boccaccio, of course, Gisippus lives out the rest of his life with Titus in Rome. But this is how Elyot ends his tale: <cit>
                  <quote>
                     <p>Gisippus, desiring to be again in his proper country, Titus, by the consent of the Senate and people, assembled a great army and went with Gisippus unto Athens; where he, having
                        delivered to him all those which were the causes of banishing and despoiling of his friend Gisippus, he did on them sharp execution, and restoring Gisippus his lands and
                        substance, stablished him in perpetual quietness, and so returned to Rome. (183)</p>
                  </quote>
               </cit> This departure from Boccaccio’s version of the tale is to some extent suggested by the threat which Tito makes to the families of Gisippo and Sofronia, where he
                tells them that, if they refuse to hand back the girl so that he can take her to Rome as his wife, he will take Gisippo with him instead. Tito concludes his speech with these ominous
                words: ‘And I, with unremitting enmity towards you, will make you know by experience what the fury of Roman passions can do’ (086). Beroaldus translates this finale as
                follows: ‘And, by harassing you with the harshest enmity, I shall make plain the violent wrath [<hi rend="italic">indignationes</hi>] of Roman passions’ (161).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN8">
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi>
               </ref> And now Walter: <cit>
                  <quote>
                     <p>With armed power I shall again [<hi rend="italic">against</hi>] you rise,</p>
                     <p>Sophrone with strong hand for to take you fro,</p>
                     <p>By fell battle I shall entreat you so</p>
                     <p>That ye shall know what indignation</p>
                     <p>Romans will take for your transgression. (534–9)</p>
                  </quote>
               </cit> Wright remarks that ‘it was left for Walter to make [Titus] threaten an invasion of Greece with military forces’;<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN9">
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi>
               </ref> and it may well be that Walter worked up the image of armed invasion from the Beroaldus’s <hi rend="italic">indignationes</hi>. But it seems to me more
                likely that Walter had an eye on the remarkably altered ending of Elyot’s version of the tale and developed the obscure threat he read in Beroaldus into something much more
                powerfully graphic along those very lines.</p>
         </div>
         <div>
            <head>III</head>
            <p>In both the examples cited above, my argument for the priority of Elyot’s text with regard to Walter’s translation has rested on the same methodological assumption, namely,
                a version of the argument <hi rend="italic">a maiore</hi>. If the same deviation occurs in both Walter and Elyot, and if that detail is more deeply embedded in a system or narrative of
                adjustments in Elyot than it is in Walter, then I have argued that Walter is likely to have seen the detail in Elyot and appropriated it for his own text, rather than that the reverse
                is the case, or that both authors had independently made the same alteration. The second example is stronger than the first because it deals with inserted material, rather than the
                choice of a single word used to translate a word in Beroaldus. In my final example, the same <hi rend="italic">modus operandi</hi>, applied to another insertion, seems especially
                convincing.</p>
            <p>About half-way through his poem, Walter introduces a chapter heading: ‘How Gisippus went out of his chamber to Titus and how Titus lay with Sophrone’ (322.1–2). The
                next stanza reads thus: <cit>
                  <quote>
                     <p>This marriage in that time was used,</p>
                     <p>That, after the triumph of the wedding,</p>
                     <p>The spouse and bride should be brought unto bed,</p>
                     <p>Where <hi rend="italic">each unto other should give a ring</hi>,</p>
                     <p>And if they made thereat no refusing,</p>
                     <p>Then during their life they do each other take,</p>
                     <p>And, else, they may promise then forsake. (323–19, <hi rend="italic">emphasis added</hi>)</p>
                  </quote>
               </cit> In Beroaldus there is no exchange of rings, though Titus does put one on the finger of Sophronia, and he does ask her if she will accept him as her husband. The same is
                true in Boccaccio, who, at this point, muddled his own original: <hi rend="italic">Li romans d’Athis et Procelias</hi>. There Procelias actually <hi rend="italic">took</hi> a ring from the
                finger of his ‘bride’, as a token of proof that he, not Athis, had slept with her.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN10">
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi>
               </ref> Boccaccio’s badly
                motivated action is passed on to Walter <hi rend="italic">via</hi> Beroaldus, but in neither case is there any exchange of rings or vows.</p>
            <p>Wright says of Walter: ‘he interpolates an explanation of Greek marriage customs, in order that the subsequent course of the story may be more easily intelligible to the
                    reader’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN11">
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi>
               </ref> True again; but I suggest that he got the idea from Elyot, who pays a good deal of attention to the problem
                of Boccaccio’s ring. First he makes Gisippus remind Titus of this custom:<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN12">
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi>
               </ref>
                <cit>
                  <quote>
                     <p>Ye do remember, that the custom is that, notwithstanding any ceremony done at the time of the spousals, the marriage notwithstanding is not confirmed, until at night that the
                        husband putteth a ring on the finger of his wife and unlooseth her girdle. (172)</p>
                  </quote>
               </cit>
            </p>
            <p>Then we hear how Titus carried out what was required of him in the nuptial couch: <cit>
                  <quote>
                     <p>And first he sweetly demanded her if that she loved him and deigned to take him for her husband, forsaking all other; which she, all blushing, with an eye half laughing, half
                        mourning (as in point to depart from her maidenhead, but supposing it to be Gisippus that asked her) affirmed. And then he eftsoons asketh her, if she, in ratifying that
                        promise, would receive his ring, which he had there already; whereto, she consenting, putteth the ring on her finger, and unlooseth her girdle. (174)</p>
                  </quote>
               </cit>
            </p>
            <p>We should note here that Elyot makes the two boys identical non-biological twins, so that, as Gisippus says to Titus: ‘for the similitude of our personages, and of our apparel, ye
                shall not be espied of the women, which have with none of us any acquaintance’ (172). This is why Sophronia does not realize she is sleeping with Titus, not Gisippus. Finally,
                Titus speaks plainly to the Athenians: <cit>
                  <quote>
                     <p>And it is I, Titus, that have verily wedded her; I have put the ring on her finger; I have undone the girdle of shamefastness. What will ye more? I have lyen
                            [<hi rend="italic">lain</hi>] with her, and confirmed the matrimony, and made her a wife. (177)</p>
                  </quote>
               </cit>
            </p>
            <p>Surely Walter has been impressed with the insistent repetition of this detail in Elyot’s version and inserted an abbreviated version of it in his own translation of Beroaldus. It
                might be argued that Elyot had spotted the detail in Walter and greatly expanded it; but surely the detail of the ring refutes this argument. In Beroaldus, Titus gives Sophronia a
                ring, and Elyot rationalizes this as a Greek marriage ritual; but Walter goes even further by stating there is an <hi rend="italic">exchange</hi> of rings—‘each unto other should
                give a ring’—which does not actually take place even in his own version of the story. Likewise, the final line of the stanza quoted above—‘else, they may
                promise then forsake’—also looks like a rather hasty account of Elyot’s insistence on the uniquely binding legality of the groom’s giving of the ring to his
                bride. Thus, details which are securely embedded in the structure of Elyot’s narrative seem to be detached from their original programme and attached—like
                    <hi rend="italic">appliqué</hi> motifs—to Walter’s translation.</p>
         </div>
         <div>
            <head>*</head>
            <p>It is the lot of the <hi rend="italic">Quellenforscher</hi> to be beset with doubts about the technicalities of the trade, and I have not tried to push the case for Elyot’s ‘Titus
                and Gisippus’ as a source for Walter’s <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gisippus</hi> further than the evidence seems to allow. But I hope at least to have opened up a line of inquiry
                which will interest not only the philologist, but also the student of English prose fiction, for Elyot’s ‘Titus and Gisippus’ is ‘probably the first
                    <hi rend="italic">novella</hi> in English’.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN13">
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi>
               </ref> Herbert Wright very cautiously admitted the possibility that Elyot
                    <hi rend="italic">might</hi> have owed something to Walter.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs178-FN14">
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi>
               </ref> But is it not <hi rend="italic">more interesting</hi> that Walter might
                have used Elyot? We no longer feel the need, as Wright did, to make unfavourable comparisons between these early Tudor translators and their allegedly more sophisticated contintental
                counterparts; but it is still piquant to imagine Walter adding ornamental details from a humble English author to his translation of the exquisite Beroaldus!</p>
         </div>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="fn-group">
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN1">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi> References to Elyot are by page from Thomas Elyot, <hi rend="italic">The Book Named the Governor</hi> (1531; London / New York, 1907). References to Beroaldus, by page, and
                    Walter, by line, are taken from Herbert G. Wright (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions of the Tales of Guiscardo and Ghismonda and Titus and Gisippus from the Decameron</hi>,
                        <hi rend="italic">EETS</hi> o.s. ccv (London, 1937), 133–74. References to Boccaccio’s <hi rend="italic">Decamerone</hi> are to section numbers assigned to Branca’s 1992
                    Einaudi edition as reproduced—very accessibly and with an English translation!—at the Decameron Web Project hosted by Brown University, at &lt;<ref type="uri"
                       target="http://www.brown.edu/Departments/Italian_Studies/dweb">http://www.brown.edu/Departments/Italian_Studies/dweb</ref>&gt;, last accessed July 2012. All references to these texts are inserted in parentheses after the quotation.
                    The English texts have been modernized, and the Latin regularized. Finally, the translations from Beroaldus and Boccaccio are my own.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN2">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">2</hi> See Wright, <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions</hi>, liv–lvi, lxxvii–lxxviii.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN3">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">3</hi> The same date appears in the brief notes on William Walter in the <hi rend="italic">ODNB</hi> (where, incidentally, the source for <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gisippus</hi> is
                    mistakenly given as Bruni rather than Beroaldus). The dating of Walter’s translation to ‘1525?’ is presumably based on the fact that sir Henry Marney died in
                    1523; but Walter only says that he was ‘formerly’ servant to Marney, and de Worde could have printed the book any time up to his death in 1534/5, that is, a few years
                        <hi rend="italic">after</hi> the publication of Elyot’s <hi rend="italic">Governor</hi>. De Worde printed Walter’s translation of Leonardi Bruni’s translation of
                    Boccaccio’s tale of <hi rend="italic">Guistard and Sigismond</hi> in 1532; Walter’s <hi rend="italic">Spectacle of Lovers</hi>, also printed by de Worde, is tentatively dated by
                        <hi rend="italic">STC</hi> to ‘1533?’. Both title-pages declare Walter to be a servant of Marney—but without the ‘formerly’ of that of <hi rend="italic">Titus and
                        Gisippus</hi>. The situation is confused, then, and thus does not really present a problem for the late composition of the latter work.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN4">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi> Wright, <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions</hi>, lxxxviii.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN5">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi> It has always been assumed that Elyot probably went to Beroaldus rather than Boccaccio. For the state of play in the early days of Elyot scholarship, see Clement Tyson
                    Goode, ‘Sir Thomas Elyot’s <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gysippus</hi>’, <hi rend="italic">MLN</hi>, xxxvii (1922), 1–11 (1–2); and for a later generation of
                    scholars, see John Hazel Smith (ed.), <hi rend="italic">Two Latin Comedies by John Foxe the Martyrologist</hi> (Ithaca, 1973), 13–14.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN6">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi> See Jan Stok of Wąchock [Wąchocczyk], <hi rend="italic">Historia o przyjaźni Tytusa z Gizipusem</hi> (1564), in <hi rend="italic">Powieści
                        wierszowane</hi>, ed. Samuel Adalberg (Kraków, 1897), 1–17 (1); Gáspár Veres of Szeged [Szegedi Veres Gáspar], <hi rend="italic">Titus és
                        Gisippus históriája</hi> (1577), in <hi rend="italic">Balassi Bálint és a 16. század költői</hi>, ed. Endre Illés
                        <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (Budapest, 1979), I, 558–80 (558).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN7">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi> Thomas Elyot, <hi rend="italic">Dictionary</hi> (1538: <hi rend="italic">STC</hi> 7659), via <hi rend="italic">EEBO</hi>, image 102.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN8">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi> Something of Beroaldus’s style of translation may be gleaned from comparing these two passages: ‘e quanto lo sdegno de’ romani animi possa, sempre
                    nimicandovi, vi farò per esperienza conoscere’; and ‘et inimicitias vobiscum truculentissimas exercens planum faciam quam sint vehementes animorum Romanorum
                    indignationes’.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN9">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi> Wright, <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions</hi>, lxxxii.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN10">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi> See <hi rend="italic">Li Romans d’Athis et Procelias</hi>, ed. by Marie-Madeleine Castellani (Paris, 2006), lines 926–33. For the record, there are several other
                    rather striking similarities between Elyot’s ‘Titus and Gisippus’ and <hi rend="italic">Athis et Procelias</hi>. Athis and Procelias are also non-biological identical
                    twins, and Procelias also takes a Roman army to Athens to restore Athis to his patrimony. Could Elyot have known of the romance?</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN11">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi> Wright, <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions</hi>, lxxx.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN12">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi> When Edward Lewicke versified Elyot’s version as <hi rend="italic">Titus and Gisippus</hi> in 1562, he not only reproduces Gisippus’s advice to Titus about the
                    ring and the girdle in the text of his poem, but also, more or less in Elyot’s own words, in its margin. See Wright, <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions</hi>, 175–216
                    (p. 190 and lines 353–360). These three passages also caught the eye of Lorna Hutson, who quotes them at length in her study of the story of Titus and Gisippus in <hi rend="italic">The
                        Usurer’s Daughter: Male Friendship and Fictions of Women in Sixteenth-Century England</hi> (London, 1994), 58–9.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN13">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi> Hutson, <hi rend="italic">Usurer’s Daughter</hi>, 57.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs178-FN14">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi> See Wright, <hi rend="italic">Early English Versions</hi>, xcv, and <hi rend="italic">Boccaccio in England from Chaucer to Tennyson</hi> (London, 1957), 153.</p>
            </note>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
