<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="EN">
   <teiHeader>
      <fileDesc>
         <titleStmt>
            <title level="a" type="main">A Misdated St Paul’s Fabric Indulgence</title>
         </titleStmt>
         <publicationStmt>
            <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
            <availability>
               <p>© The Author (2012). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
                    journals.permissions@oup.com</p>
            </availability>
            <date>2012</date>
         </publicationStmt>
         <sourceDesc>
            <biblStruct type="article">
               <analytic>
                  <author>
                     <persName>
                        <surname>Armstrong</surname>
                        <forename type="first">Lawrin</forename>
                     </persName>
                  </author>
                  <title level="a" type="main">A Misdated St Paul’s Fabric Indulgence</title>
                  <idno type="articleId"/>
               </analytic>
               <monogr>
                  <title level="j" type="main">Notes and Queries</title>
                  <title level="j" type="publisher-id">notesj</title>
                  <title level="j" type="hwp">notesj</title>
                  <idno type="pISSN">0029-3970</idno>
                  <idno type="eISSN">1471-6941</idno>
                  <imprint>
                     <publisher>Oxford University Press</publisher>
                     <date type="Published" when="2012-12"/>
                     <date type="ePublished" when="2012-10-18"/>
                     <biblScope unit="vol">59</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="issue">4</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" from="483">483</biblScope>
                     <biblScope unit="page" to="487">487</biblScope>
                  </imprint>
               </monogr>
               <idno type="DOI">10.1093/notesj/gjs138</idno>
               <idno type="publisherID">gjs138</idno>
            </biblStruct>
         </sourceDesc>
      </fileDesc>
   </teiHeader>
   <text>
      <body>
         <p>GUILDHALL LIBRARY, London, St Paul’s Cathedral MS 25124 is a collection of seventy-seven original thirteenth- and fourteenth-century letters of indulgence issued to finance the
            rebuilding of St Paul’s after fires in 1087 and 1136 destroyed the Saxon church and work on a Norman replacement. One of the most ambitious construction projects of the era, the
            cathedral was not finished until 1327 and attracted a wealth of such privileges, particularly in the mid-thirteenth century, when work had progressed sufficiently for the church to be
            dedicated on 13 January 1241 and a fresh phase of construction launched with a generous indulgence of Innocent IV (1252).<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN1">
               <hi rend="superscript">1</hi>
            </ref> The bulk
            of the indulgences collected in 25124 were awarded by English and Welsh bishops, though Scottish, Irish, and continental sees are also represented. The collection was catalogued and
            arranged in chronological order by William Sparrow Simpson, minor canon and cathedral librarian from 1862 to 1897, who also supplied an annotated list and edited seven examples from the
            series in a selection of documents illustrating the history of St Paul’s published by the Camden Society. Originally housed in the cathedral library, the collection was transferred
            along with the remainder of the St Paul’s archive to the Guildhall Library in 1980.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN2">
               <hi rend="superscript">2</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>The first and, in Sparrow Simpson’s judgement, the earliest document in the series, 25124/1, was issued at St Paul’s by a bishop of Bangor identified, as was common in English
            episcopal acts, only by his initial, ‘R’, and dated to St Lucy’s day (13 December) ‘in the fourth year of our pontificate’. Sparrow Simpson identified the
            author as Robert of Shrewsbury, bishop of Bangor from 1197 to 1212, and dated the indulgence to 1201.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN3">
               <hi rend="superscript">3</hi>
            </ref> To my knowledge, the
            attribution and dating have not been challenged in the more recent literature.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN4">
               <hi rend="superscript">4</hi>
            </ref> There are, however, two other possible candidates:
            Rotoland, sub-prior of the Cistercian abbey of Aberconwy and bishop of Bangor from approximately 1191 to 1196; and Master Richard, archdeacon of Bangor, who was elected in 1236,
            consecrated in 1237, and occupied the see until his death in 1267.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN5">
               <hi rend="superscript">5</hi>
            </ref> The contention of this note is that for the reasons outlined
            below 25124/1 should in fact be dated to 1240 and attributed to Bishop Richard.</p>
         <p>Unfortunately, the seal attached to 25124/1 is damaged and therefore provides no firm evidence for the date and attribution of the act. It exhibits the standard iconographic and physical
            features of a thirteenth-century Welsh episcopal seal: in green wax, it measures approximately 40 × 33 mm, is in a vesical (pointed-oval) form, and is attached by a double queue, a
            parchment tag passed through an incision in the fold at the foot of the document.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN6">
               <hi rend="superscript">6</hi>
            </ref> The obverse depicts a bishop in eucharistic
            vestments under a canopy, right hand raised in blessing, holding in his left a pastoral staff turned inwards; the reverse depicts what appears to be a human figure on the right and a
            sphere to the left. The legends, of which only the word ‘sigillum’ on the obverse is clearly decipherable, are in the ‘Lombardic’ capitals customarily used on
            episcopal seals in the first half of the thirteenth century.</p>
         <p>The text of the act, of which a fresh transcription is printed below, is in most respects typical of the rising tide of indulgences produced in the later twelfth and thirteenth centuries
            not only to solicit alms for the construction of churches, but also to endow religious foundations, to foster devotions, to relieve the poor, and even to build bridges, roads, and
            harbours. In the disposition, the bishop of Bangor extends to the faithful of his own jurisdiction who contribute to the St Paul’s building fund, and to any other donors whose
            diocesans ratify his indulgence, the relaxation of forty days’ ‘enjoined penance’—a penalty such as fasting or pilgrimage imposed by the penitent’s
            confessor—on condition of sincere contrition and confession.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN7">
               <hi rend="superscript">7</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>It is significant that the <hi rend="italic">arenga</hi>, or preamble, of 25124/1 employs the ‘Quoniam ut ait’ formula, which is constructed around two quotations from Paul’s
            second letter to the Corinthians (5:10 and 9:6): <cit>
               <quote>
                  <p>Since, as the Apostle says, ‘we shall all stand before the judgement seat of Jesus Christ to receive according as we have done in the flesh, whether good or ill,’ it
                    befits us to anticipate the day of the final harvest by works of mercy and, mindful of things eternal, to sow on earth what, when the Lord rewards us, we, standing fast in hope and
                    faith, may reap in heaven in increased yield, for ‘he who sows sparingly shall also reap sparingly, and he who sows bountifully shall also bountifully reap’ eternal
                    life.</p>
               </quote>
            </cit> Employed in papal acts as early as Eugene III (1145–53), the formula was recommended by canon 62 of the Fourth Lateran Council (1215) as a model for bishops licensing
            the seekers (<hi rend="italic">quaestores</hi>) of alms and pardoners who advertised indulgences.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN8">
               <hi rend="superscript">8</hi>
            </ref> Innocent III (1198–1216) granted
            an indulgence in the ‘Quoniam ut ait’ form in favour of the hospital of SS James and John in Aynho, Northamptonshire, during the closing session of the council, and Honorius
            III (1216–27) used the formula in two indulgences in favour of English beneficiaries.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN9">
               <hi rend="superscript">9</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>It appears that the formula was not employed in English episcopal indulgences before the 1220s. For example, the remission of forty days’ penance granted around 1175 to contributors
            to the cathedral fabric fund by Gilbert Foliot, bishop of London (1163–87), contains only an echo of 2 Corinthians 9:6: ‘Listen to your master; hear and receive his wise
            counsel. You can sow now what you would receive in eternal life. Now is winter, now the time to sow corn; but if the last hour has shut your eyes, this is no time to sow.’<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN10">
               <hi rend="superscript">10</hi>
            </ref> A review of the first thirty-seven volumes of the <hi rend="italic">English Episcopal Acta</hi> series reveals no example of the
            ‘Quoniam ut ait’ formula earlier than an indulgence of 1231, itself modelled on an award of Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury, to the same beneficiary and dated August
                1226.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN11">
               <hi rend="superscript">11</hi>
            </ref> In form, twelfth-century English indulgences rarely seem to have been composed according to a standard model, but rather
            were tailored to the beneficiaries, alluding, for example, to their patron saints or functions, and often, like Foliot’s, so packed with scriptural allusions that they resembled
            short homilies.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN12">
               <hi rend="superscript">12</hi>
            </ref> The reproduction of the IV Lateran formula in 25124/1 suggests that it should not be dated earlier than 1215.</p>
         <p>The decisive argument for the attribution of 25124/1 to Bishop Richard, however, is palaeographic: the document was written by a scribe responsible for three other precisely datable
            indulgences in the same collection, all of them awarded in London between 1237 and 1241. The first, 25124/10, by Christian, bishop of Emly in Ireland (1236 × 1237–1249), is
            dated 28 October 1237;<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN13">
               <hi rend="superscript">13</hi>
            </ref> the second, 25124/12, by Richard Wendene, bishop of Rochester (1238–50), 25 January 1240;<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN14">
               <hi rend="superscript">14</hi>
            </ref> and the third, 25124/15, by Hugh Pattishall, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield (1240–41), 9 November 1241.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN15">
               <hi rend="superscript">15</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>The hand of all four indulgences is in an elaborate and polished chancery script that lacks the cursive traits to be seen in contemporary court scripts.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN16">
               <hi rend="superscript">16</hi>
            </ref> Its principal features may be summarized as follows. The majuscules <hi rend="italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="italic">D</hi>, <hi rend="italic">E</hi>,
                <hi rend="italic">H</hi>, <hi rend="italic">O</hi>, <hi rend="italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Q</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">R</hi> are usually written with doubled horizontal or vertical strokes, in the case of
                <hi rend="italic">D</hi>, sometimes both; <hi rend="italic">N</hi> with one or two horizontal middle strokes. Tironian <hi rend="italic">et</hi> is barred with a concluding serif to the right. Among the
            minuscules, ascenders of <hi rend="italic">b</hi>, <hi rend="italic">d</hi> (where the upright, rather than the uncial, form is used), <hi rend="italic">h</hi>, <hi rend="italic">k</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">l</hi>
            are slightly notched; the ascender of the two-compartment <hi rend="italic">a</hi> extends as far above the headline as <hi rend="italic">f</hi> and <hi rend="italic">s-longa</hi>; the descenders of
                <hi rend="italic">p</hi>, <hi rend="italic">q</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">r</hi> terminate in a leftward stroke; <hi rend="italic">g</hi> is open and has a long, horizontal tail to the left, as does
                <hi rend="italic">x</hi>; and the final stroke of terminal <hi rend="italic">m</hi> and <hi rend="italic">n</hi> curve down to the left and end in a horizontal rightward stroke, often with an additional
            horizontal cross-stroke through the descender. Perhaps the most distinctive feature of the script consists in the short horizontal cross-strokes or flourishes joined by oblique hairlines
            with which the scribe decorates the ascenders of minuscule <hi rend="italic">s</hi> and <hi rend="italic">f</hi>; he occasionally employs a similar figure for the <hi rend="italic">er</hi>,
                <hi rend="italic">us</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">um</hi> suspensions, which are otherwise indicated by the usual strokes. The scribe never identifies himself, but he might have been employed in
            the household of Roger Niger, bishop of London between 1229 and 1241, or by one of the other ecclesiastical bodies seated in London.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN17">
               <hi rend="superscript">17</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <p>The physical layout of all four indulgences is similar: three (25124/1, 10, and 12) measure on average 190 × 135 mm (excluding the fold) and seals are attached by parchment double
            queues. More significantly, 25124/10 and 12 also employ the ‘Quoniam ut ait’ formula, and the phrasing of the balance of the texts is virtually identical to that of 25124/1.
            Likewise, the <hi rend="italic">mise en page</hi> of 25124/1, 10, and 12, including lineation, is similar. 25124/15 is smaller in format (170 × 96 mm) and employs a truncated formula from
            which scriptural allusions have been eliminated.</p>
         <p>On balance, both the formal and the palaeographic evidence indicate that 25124/1 should be redated to 13 December 1240, Bishop Richard’s fourth pontifical year.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN18">
               <hi rend="superscript">18</hi>
            </ref> It therefore represents one of a clutch of indulgences awarded around the time of the dedication of St Paul’s in 1241 rather than the
            earliest surviving fabric indulgence in the cathedral archive.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN19">
               <hi rend="superscript">19</hi>
            </ref>
         </p>
         <div>
            <head/>
            <div>
               <head/>
               <div>
                  <head>Text</head>
                  <p>Original, parchment, 181/186 × 130 mm (excluding fold), sealed in green wax (approx. 33 × 40 mm) attached by a parchment double queue. Guildhall Library, London, St
                        Paul’s Cathedral MS 25124/1.</p>
                  <p>
                     <hi rend="italic">Note</hi>: The orthography of the document has been retained with the exception of <hi rend="italic">u</hi>, which has been transcribed as <hi rend="italic">v</hi> when it
                        represents a consonant and as <hi rend="italic">u</hi> a vowel. <hi rend="italic">I-longa</hi>, always in the initial position and majuscule, has been transcribed as
                            <hi rend="italic">I</hi>/<hi rend="italic">i</hi>. Punctuation and capitalization are editorial. <cit>
                        <quote>
                           <p>Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit R., dei gracia Bangorensis episcopus, salutem in domino. Quoniam, ut ait | apostolus, ‘omnes
                                stabimus ante tribunal Ihesu Christi recepturi prout in corpore gessimus sive bonum fuerit sive malum’,<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN20">
                                 <hi rend="superscript">20</hi>
                              </ref>
                                | oportet nos diem messionis extreme misericordie &lt;operibus&gt;<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN21">
                                 <hi rend="superscript">21</hi>
                              </ref> prevenire ac eternorum intuitu
                                seminare in terris quod reddente domino | cum multiplicato fructu recolligere debeamus in celis firmam spem fiduciamque tenentes, quoniam ‘qui parce
                                semi-|-nat parce et metet et qui seminat in benediccionibus de benediccionibus et metet’<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN22">
                                 <hi rend="superscript">22</hi>
                              </ref> vitam
                                eternam. Cum igitur inter | opera caritatis non inmerito debeat computari ecclesiarum fabricis pias elemosinarum largiciones misericorditer inpartiri, |
                                universitatem vestram rogamus attencius monentes et exortantes in domino quatinus ad fabricam ecclesie sancti Pauli | London. de bonis vobis a deo collatis aliqua
                                caritatis subsidia erogetis ut per hec <hi rend="italic">et </hi>alia bona que domino inspi-|-rante feceritis eterna possitis gaudia promereri. Nos vero de dei
                                misericordia et gloriose virginis Marie, beati Pauli et | omnium sanctorum meritis confisi omnibus parochianis nostris ac aliis universis quorum diocesani hanc
                                nostram ratam | habuerint indulgenciam qui ad fabricam dicte ecclesie suas duxerint elemosinas conferendas, si de peccatis suis | vere contriti fuerint et
                                confessi, quadraginta dies de iniuncta sibi penitencia misericorditer relaxamus. | Datum London. apud sanctum Paulum die sancte Lucie virginis, pontificatus nostri
                                anno quarto.<ref type="fn" target="#gjs138-FN23">
                                 <hi rend="superscript">23</hi>
                              </ref>
                           </p>
                        </quote>
                     </cit>
                    </p>
               </div>
            </div>
         </div>
      </body>
      <back>
         <div type="fn-group">
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN1">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">1</hi> C. D. Cragoe, ‘Fabric, Tombs and Precincts, 1087–1540’, in D. Keene <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (eds), <hi rend="italic">St Paul’s: The Cathedral Church of
                        London</hi> (New Haven, 2004), 127–42. Thirty-three episcopal indulgences issued between 1235 and 1260 are collected in 25124, and these probably represent only a
                    fraction of the total; see W. Sparrow Simpson, <hi rend="italic">Documents Illustrating the History of St Paul’s Cathedral</hi>, Camden Society, n.s. 26 (Westminster, 1880),
                    appendix A, 175–6. For Innocent IV’s indulgence of a year and forty days, see <hi rend="italic">ibid</hi>., 3–4.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN2">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">2</hi> N. Ramsey, ‘The Library and Archives to 1897’, in Keene <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (eds), <hi rend="italic">St Paul’s</hi>, 424–5, and J. J. Wisdom,
                    ‘The Library, 1897–2004’, in <hi rend="italic">ibid</hi>., 429; and ‘Guildhall Library Manuscripts Section: St Paul’s Cathedral Archives’ available at
                        &lt;<ref type="uri" target="http://www.history.ac.uk/gh/stp.htm">http://www.history.ac.uk/gh/stp.htm</ref>&gt;.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN3">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">3</hi> Sparrow Simpson, 1–2, 175. Correctly, 1200: Robert of Shrewsbury was consecrated 16 March 1197, so 13 December of his fourth pontifical year fell in 1200. See J.
                    Le Neve, <hi rend="italic">Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1066–1300</hi>, rev. edn, IX, <hi rend="italic">The Welsh Cathedrals (Bangor, Llandaff, St Asaph, St Davids)</hi>, ed. M. Pearson
                    (London, 2003), 3. The pontifical year was usually calculated from the date of consecration rather than election, presumably in imitation of papal practice; see C. R. Cheney and M.
                    Jones, <hi rend="italic">A Handbook of Dates for Students of British History</hi>, rev. edn (Cambridge, 2000), 94; and <hi rend="italic">Lexikon des Mittelaters</hi>, s.v. ‘Datierung von
                    Urkunden’, by P.-J. Schuler, col. 577.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN4">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">4</hi> For example, R. Graham, ‘An Appeal about 1175 for the Building of St. Paul’s Cathedral Church’, <hi rend="italic">JBAA</hi>, 3rd ser., 10 (1945–7),
                    76; J. E. Sayers, <hi rend="italic">Papal Government and England During the Pontificate of Honorius III (1216–1227)</hi> (Cambridge, 1984), 114–5; and the ‘Documents of
                    Early England Data Set’ of the University of Toronto (&lt;<ref type="uri" target="http://res.deeds.utoronto.ca:49838/research/">http://res.deeds.utoronto.ca:49838/research/</ref>&gt;), all of whom accept Sparrow Simpson’s dating.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN5">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">5</hi> Le Neve and Pearson, <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi>, IX, 3.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN6">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">6</hi> D. H. Williams, ‘Catalogue of Welsh Ecclesiastical Seals as Known Down to 1600 A.D.’, <hi rend="italic">Archaeologia Cambrensis</hi>, cxxxiii (1984), 105–9.
                    Williams provides a description of what might be Bishop Richard’s privy seal at 111, but the seal of 25124/1 appears to be the great seal, employed for more solemn
                    transactions.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN7">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">7</hi> On the theory and practice of English indulgences up to 1215, see N. Vincent, ‘Some Pardoners’ Tales: The Earliest English Indulgences’,
                        <hi rend="italic">Transactions of the Royal Historical Society</hi> 6th ser., (2002), 23–58.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN8">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">8</hi> For Eugene III, see Sayers, 114, n.125, and P. Jaffé and S. Loewenfeld, <hi rend="italic">Regesta pontificum Romanorum ad 1198</hi> (Leipzig, 1885–8), II, no.
                    9639. For examples from later twelfth-century papal documents, see Vincent, 53, n.120. The Lateran decree is published by J. Alberigo <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (eds),
                        <hi rend="italic">Conciliorum Oecumenicarum Decreta</hi> (Bologna, 1972), 263–4. It was subsequently incorporated into Gregory IX’s decretal collection; see <hi rend="italic">Liber
                        extra</hi> 5.38.14 <hi rend="italic">Quum ex eo</hi>, ed. E. Friedberg, <hi rend="italic">Corpus iuris canonici</hi> (Leipzig, 1882; repr. Graz, 1956), II, cols 888–9.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN9">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">9</hi> Sayers, 114; Vincent, 53–4.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN10">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">10</hi> ‘Audite magistrum uestrum, audite sanum et suscipite consilium. Seminare nunc potestis, quod in eterna uita suscipiatis. Nunc hyemps est, tempus sementis
                    iaciende nunc est, hora uobis oculos extrema si clauserit, non iam seminandi tempus erit; Z. N. Brooke, A. Morey, and C. N. L. Brooke, (eds) <hi rend="italic">The Letters and Charters of
                        Gilbert Foliot</hi> (Cambridge, 1967), 307 (no. 235). Cf. <hi rend="italic">ibid</hi>., 461 (no. 424). On the context of Foliot’s indulgence, see Graham, ‘An
                    Appeal’, 73–6.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN11">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">11</hi> St Ethelbert’s hospital, Hereford; see <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> VII: <hi rend="italic">Hereford 1079–1234</hi>, ed. J. Barrow (London, 1993), 275–6 and note
                    (no. 344). The adoption of the formula by English bishops was more common than the remarks of C. R. Cheney suggest; see <hi rend="italic">English Bishops’ Chanceries</hi>
                    (Manchester, 1950), 76–7. For additional examples, see <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XIII: <hi rend="italic">Worcester 1218–1268</hi>, ed. P. M. Hoskin (London, 1997), 98–9 (no.
                    122), 24 January 1253 (in favour of St Paul’s); <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XXII: <hi rend="italic">Chichester 1215–1253</hi>, ed. P. M. Hoskin (London, 2001), 46–7 (no. 62),
                    8 September 1234, and 106–7 (no. 130), 2 April 1247; <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XXIX: <hi rend="italic">Durham 1241–1283</hi>, ed. P. M. Hoskin (London, 2005), 69 (no. 73), 30
                    January 1256, and 75–6 (no. 80), 6 March 1255; <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XXXVI: <hi rend="italic">Salisbury 1229–1262</hi>, ed. B. R. Kemp (London, 2010), 66–7 (no. 50), 27
                    May 1229 × 1234, and 78–9 (no. 59), 24 April 1237; and <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XXXVIII: <hi rend="italic">London 1229–1280</hi>, ed. P. M. Hoskin (London, 2011),
                    93–4 (no. 130), 27 February 1262. Unfortunately, I was unable to review all texts of indulgences that are simply calendared in the <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi>. The earliest example
                    of the ‘Quoniam ut ait’ formula in a continental episcopal (as opposed to a papal) act generated by a search of the virtual archive ‘Monasterium.Net’ dates
                    from 1233 (&lt;<ref type="uri" target="http://vdu.uni-koeln.de:8181/mom/home">http://vdu.uni-koeln.de:8181/mom/home</ref>&gt;; last accessed 16 August 2011).</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN12">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">12</hi> On the homiletic character of many indulgences, designed to preclude <hi rend="italic">ad hoc</hi> and probably unorthodox sermons by pardoners, see Vincent, 54–5.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN13">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">13</hi> C. Eubel, <hi rend="italic">Hierarchia Catholica Medii Aevi</hi> (Munich, 1913), I, 283; E. B. Fryde, <hi rend="italic">Handbook of British Chronology</hi>, 3rd edn (London,
                    1986), 354. The date of election and consecration can be narrowed to 1236–7 on the evidence of 25124/10. H. Cotton, <hi rend="italic">Fasti eccelsiae hibernicae</hi>, vol. 1:
                        <hi rend="italic">Munster</hi>, 2nd edn (Dublin, 1851), 86, has Christian’s election confirmed on 28 October 1237; if so, perhaps this was the occasion of the indulgence.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN14">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">14</hi> J. Le Neve, <hi rend="italic">Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1066–1300</hi>, rev. edn, II, <hi rend="italic">Monastic Cathedrals (Northern and Southern Provinces)</hi>, ed. D.
                    E. Greenway (London, 1971), 77; Fryde, 267.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN15">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">15</hi> Fryde, 253.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN16">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">16</hi> For examples of similar scripts, see <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> VII: <hi rend="italic">Hereford 1079–1234</hi>, pl. II (1198) and pl. III (1200 × 1201);
                        <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> IX: <hi rend="italic">Winchester 1205–1243</hi>, ed. N. Vincent (London, 1994), pl. III (‘scribe 4,’ <hi rend="italic">c</hi>. 1220);
                        <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XVIII: <hi rend="italic">Salisbury 1078–1217</hi>, ed. B. R. Kemp (London, 1999), pl. VI (= no. 365 in <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XIX: <hi rend="italic">Salisbury
                        1217–1228</hi> (London, 2000) (dated 1224 × 1229); <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XXX: <hi rend="italic">Carlisle 1133–1292</hi>, ed. D. M. Smith (London, 2005), pl. II
                    (1219 × 1223); and C. Johnson and H. Jenkinson, <hi rend="italic">English Court Hands</hi> (Oxford, 1915; repr. New York, 1967), I, 113–4; II, pl. ix (c), dated 1204.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN17">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">17</hi> J. Le Neve, <hi rend="italic">Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1066–1300</hi>, rev. edn, I, <hi rend="italic">St Paul’s, London</hi>, ed. D. E. Greenway (London, 1968), 3;
                    Fryde, 258. None of Roger Niger’s scribes has been identified; see <hi rend="italic">EEA</hi> XXXVIII: <hi rend="italic">London 1229–1280</hi>, cxiii.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN18">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">18</hi> Le Neve and Pearson, <hi rend="italic">Fasti</hi> IX, 3, are unable to provide the date of Richard’s consecration; if he was consecrated between 14 and 31 December
                    1237, the indulgence should be dated 13 December 1241. Calculated from election (July 1236), the date would be 1239.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN19">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">19</hi> Sparrow Simpson attributes 25123/13, a second undated indulgence by ‘R,’ bishop of Bangor, to Bishop Richard (<hi rend="italic">Documents</hi>, 175). It offers
                    relaxation of thirty days’ penance to those who visit the cathedral ‘on the feast of the dedication or its anniversary’ (‘in festo dedicationis seu eiusdem
                    anniversario’). If the reference is to the dedication itself, the document should be dated to 1241, but there is no reason to exclude any later year of Richard’s
                    episcopate. By the same token, the absence of any indication of date might support an earlier attribution, perhaps to Rotoland or Robert of Shrewsbury.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN20">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">20</hi> 2 Cor. 5:10; cf. Rom. 14:10.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN21">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">21</hi>
                    <hi rend="italic">operibus</hi> is missing in 25124/1 but demanded by the sense; I have supplied it from IV Lateran, can. 62, in J. Alberigo <hi rend="italic">et al.</hi> (eds),
                        <hi rend="italic">Conciliorum Oecumenicarum Decreta,</hi> 263, and <hi rend="italic">Liber extra</hi> 5.38.14 <hi rend="italic">Quum ex eo</hi>.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN22">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">22</hi> 2 Cor. 9:6; cf. Gal. 6:8–9.</p>
            </note>
            <note place="inline" xml:id="gjs138-FN23">
               <p>
                  <hi rend="superscript">23</hi> I am grateful to the staff of the Guildhall Library for their courteous assistance and to the members of my graduate seminar on diplomatics and diplomatic editing, who
                    have often expressed reservations about Sparrow Simpson’s dating of 25124/1.</p>
            </note>
         </div>
      </back>
   </text>
</TEI>
